[Amit Varma]: This episode of The Seen and The Unseen is brought to you by Intel.
[Amit Varma]: Doing long conversations, not interviews but conversations allows me to build a relaxed,
[Amit Varma]: discursive flow that helps me to go to places I otherwise wouldn't. These deep dives would
[Amit Varma]: not be possible in shorter formats. You can read that post for my full reasoning,
[Amit Varma]: I'll link it from the show notes. Now the reason I mention it here is because a key part of my show,
[Amit Varma]: a part that I've come to enjoy more and more, is when I trace my guests' personal journey.
[Amit Varma]: They might have written a book, they might be an expert on a particular subject,
[Amit Varma]: but before we speak about that, I like to speak with them about them. This humanizes them,
[Amit Varma]: makes them more three-dimensional to me. I get a sense of the multitudes they contain.
[Amit Varma]: By learning about them, I feel that I also learn a bit about the times in which they have lived,
[Amit Varma]: in which we have lived, how society has changed or not changed, and sometimes I even get insights
[Amit Varma]: about my own self just by being forced to think about things I otherwise would not have thought
[Amit Varma]: about. This also helps give context to whatever subject we go on to discuss. Well, in today's
[Amit Varma]: episode, there is no special subject as such. My guest does host a popular podcast, but he
[Amit Varma]: hasn't written any books, and he's not a public intellectual who is known for his expertise in
[Amit Varma]: any one subject. But he's one of the sharpest and wisest people I know, and I always learn
[Amit Varma]: something from him when we speak. When I thought of who I should do my landmark episode with,
[Amit Varma]: yes, we've reached episode 250, my mind went to Narendra Shanoi. I just wanted to sit back
[Unknown]: and have a great conversation. And I did. Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen,
[Unknown]: our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host,
[Amit Varma]: Amit Verma. Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guest today is Narendra Shanoi,
[Amit Varma]: a co-host of the cult podcast, Simplified. In fact, without Narendra, there would be no
[Amit Varma]: Scene and the Unseen for reasons I explained at the start of our conversation. Narendra is a man
[Amit Varma]: of many parts. He's a successful businessman and always has stunning insights on what it is like
[Amit Varma]: to run a business in India. He's also a foodie and a fine cook. Most of all, he's a brilliant
[Amit Varma]: storyteller. His anecdotes reveal so much about our country, our society, and if I may use a
[Amit Varma]: pompous term, he never would, the human condition. So I was delighted when he came over to my home
[Amit Varma]: studio last week and we had a three hour conversation I thoroughly enjoyed. Later,
[Amit Varma]: we realized that many fantastic anecdotes from his life did not come up during the conversation.
[Amit Varma]: So I asked him over for another session, why not? And we recorded a bunch of those stories
[Amit Varma]: separately. You'll hear them one after the other after the regular conversation gets over at about
[Amit Varma]: the three-hour mark. Now, before we get to that, since this is a milestone episode, episode 250,
[Amit Varma]: I also want to thank a couple of people who helped put the show together week after week.
[Amit Varma]: Alika Gupta has done all but one of the episode cover images and her work is so distinct and so
[Amit Varma]: classy. You can find her on Twitter and Instagram at capefoxalex, that's C-A-P-E-F-O-X-A-L-I-X.
[Amit Varma]: And Gaurav Chintamani is the editor of the show. Music fans would know him as a bassist of Advaita
[Amit Varma]: and he's a highly regarded musician and producer and educator in his own right. You can find him
[Amit Varma]: at gauravchintamani.com. You can follow him on Twitter at G underscore Chintamani and on Instagram
[Amit Varma]: at gaurav underscore Chintamani. I hope my association with Alika and Gaurav lasts a lot,
[Amit Varma]: lot longer. On that happy and hopeful note, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: No man is an island, the poet John Donne once wrote. He died in 1631. You could say Donne was
[Amit Varma]: Donne, but it is almost as if he foresaw the internet. We were never islands, but we are more
[Amit Varma]: connected today than ever before. And one of the forces that keeps these connections fluid,
[Amit Varma]: that keeps us in touch, that keeps us talking is the sponsor of this episode, Intel. Intel is a
[Amit Varma]: leading player in this new connected world around us. Intel's third gen Xeon scalable processors
[Amit Varma]: keep our networks fast and they keep our networks stable. We make phone calls, we browse the
[Amit Varma]: internet, we send text messages and videos. It all seems so smooth to us. Well, Intel is the unseen
[Amit Varma]: force behind that. Where there's 5G, there's Intel. Naren, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thanks for having me, Amit. It's such an honor to be here.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I got to sort of tell my listeners the origin story of the show, basically. And in a
[Amit Varma]: sense, the origin story has everything to do with you. So a bunch of us friends were at your house
[Amit Varma]: for lunch or dinner or whatever. And we were just about to go when young Deepak Gopalakrishnan,
[Amit Varma]: better known as Chuck, dropped in because you and him were recording an episode of something
[Amit Varma]: called Simplified. And just before you left, you had something called the Narendra Sinhoy selfie
[Unknown]: stick. And we took a group selfie with that. It was around Diwali because it was a Diwali gift.
[Amit Varma]: And we took a picture. And then a couple of weeks later, Chuck put up this Facebook post about,
[Amit Varma]: hey, Simplified, our show is now on the IVM podcast network. And at which point I said,
[Amit Varma]: hey, congratulations, I'm so happy for you. And at which point the guy who runs the IVM podcast
[Amit Varma]: network, the good Amit Doshi, kind of popped in in the comments to say that, hey, you know,
[Amit Varma]: speaking to me said that, you know, I'd asked you a while back if you want to do a podcast,
[Amit Varma]: and you'd said, no, are you open to it now? So I said, okay, no harm eating. And we kind of met.
[Amit Varma]: And then the show happened and started as something completely different evolved into this.
[Amit Varma]: I parted ways with IVM after a while. So for a couple of years, the show's been completely
[Amit Varma]: independent and just mine. They of course, kickstarted it. So it's interesting how
[Amit Varma]: serendipitous things randomly happen. Because if we had left your home five minutes earlier,
[Amit Varma]: yes, or Chuck had come 10 minutes later, the scene and the unseen may not exist.
[Guest]: It's really incredible. Also, what really held everything together was the
[Guest]: what you hashtagged as the Narendra Shanoy selfie stick. So I have this
[Guest]: dear friend who every Diwali sends us gift hamper, which has the most random things. So
[Guest]: usually it has the huge, you know, it has sweets and dry fruits and things like that. And sometimes
[Guest]: it'll have a couple of packets of Pringles and sometimes it'll have a photo frame, absolutely
[Guest]: anything. So this time it had for completely mysterious reasons, a selfie stick. And Amit
[Guest]: was the one who just took off already couldn't get over the fact that there could be a selfie
[Guest]: stick rubbing shoulders with almonds and croissants and whatever. So all of you kept making fun of me.
[Guest]: And basically, I think scene unseen is born from that selfie stick is what I like to think of.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So, you know, I want to actually dwell on that selfie stick a bit and ask for your opinion
[Amit Varma]: on something because that selfie stick was, of course, part of the origin myth.
[Amit Varma]: But in a sense, metaphorically, it's a little bit more than that. Because at that point in time,
[Amit Varma]: I didn't think very highly of selfie sticks, per se, or not so much selfie sticks, which are, I
[Amit Varma]: mean, after all, just a device. But what people did with them, the constant focus on oneself and,
[Guest]: you know, that whole Instagrammification always performance. Narcissism. Yeah, you're using all
[Amit Varma]: these words, but you don't know where I'm going. But where my narrative is going is that what I
[Amit Varma]: later realized while podcasting, and what I in fact, tell my podcasting students, like I
[Amit Varma]: taught a course in podcasting for three cohorts. And what I sort of realized was, and the advice
[Amit Varma]: I would give is if you want to set your podcast apart, it is not about the idea, it is not about
[Amit Varma]: an issue, it's not about any of them. Like any niche that you think is unexplored is probably
[Amit Varma]: not unexplored. There are a dozen people out there or there will be, you know, all formats
[Amit Varma]: are done to that interview podcast, policy podcast, sab ho chuka hai, explainer podcast,
[Amit Varma]: sab ho chuka hai. What makes a podcast unique really is, is you, is you got to be authentic
[Amit Varma]: to yourself. So when I listen to interview podcast by people like Russ Roberts and Tyler
[Amit Varma]: Carvin, and all that is because I'm getting them, nobody else thinks quite like them.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, that sort of became what I started aiming for. And that's when the show really found
[Amit Varma]: its character, which was that I am on an intellectual journey, I'm curious about stuff,
[Amit Varma]: I'm trying to find out about stuff. So that's what I want to just explore. And that's, again,
[Amit Varma]: what people like about it. It's what I like about the podcast that I listen to, that is always a
[Amit Varma]: person. And in a sense is that infusion of the personal into any content that makes it special,
[Guest]: that makes it kind of stand out. It is impressionism versus realism, right? So
[Guest]: back in the day, a good painter would be someone who could paint things as good as a photograph.
[Guest]: And then when the impressionists came, impressionists started painting things in the way
[Guest]: they thought, in the way it looked to them. And that was a whole different level. And then,
[Guest]: you know, I believe realism is coming back into art, but impressionism is impressionism.
[Guest]: It's very true. So the individual is what is fascinating. Every individual is different.
[Guest]: And the perspective that they bring to it is what makes anything interesting.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah. So like, I recorded an episode with a guest recently, but which will air after this
[Amit Varma]: episode. So I won't even say who the guest is. And I've been telling him for a while, you should
[Amit Varma]: have a podcast of your own. And he was kind of hesitant about it and said, I don't sound good.
[Amit Varma]: I don't, you know, and I was like, you know, it doesn't matter. This is not radio, you don't need
[Amit Varma]: to sound good. You just need to sound like yourself. It's, again, that kind of personal
[Guest]: connect that sort of makes a difference. It's easier said than done. So I remember when I
[Guest]: started my own, you did that too. So when you start off with a medium on your own, you are
[Guest]: trying to optimize for someone else, and then it never works out. And then you get your,
[Guest]: you know, you get to act together. And then you realize that you have to be who you are.
[Guest]: And that's the easiest way to do it. And it's also the most interesting. People listen to you
[Guest]: for that reason. They want to know what you really think and not what someone else or what
[Amit Varma]: you think someone else wants to know what you think. Yeah. Yeah. So, you know, I also found
[Amit Varma]: during doing my podcast that just the long form nature of it kind of changed the way I was in my
[Amit Varma]: everyday life as well. I've written an essay on this also for my newsletter where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if you're doing a four hour podcast, your approach to it has to be very different from if you're
[Amit Varma]: doing a 20 minute podcast, you know, for a 20 minute podcast, sometimes you don't even, you
[Amit Varma]: know, people won't even read the book, or they'll just read that one book and nothing else by the
[Amit Varma]: author. And then, you know, you can ask surface questions, and you can have a standard stock of
[Amit Varma]: questions and get away with it. But for a longer podcast, you really need to listen and be open to
[Amit Varma]: where the other person is going and what directions are going in, never interrupt all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And that listening is important. We don't do enough of it in the real world. And that kind
[Amit Varma]: of changes you. So now my question is, since on Simplified, what you guys kind of do is you're
[Amit Varma]: always explaining stuff. Has it changed the way you therefore consume content, think about things?
[Amit Varma]: Like, are you a different person today than you would be when you started Simplified? Because
[Amit Varma]: what you do with Simplified is you'll take things, phenomenon, events, and kind of break them down
[Amit Varma]: and go deeper. So does that change the way that you approach everything in your everyday life,
[Amit Varma]: where you'll suddenly see something and say, huh, this could be a subject, or, you know,
[Guest]: I should look this up and research this. So that to some extent, it does, because you're
[Guest]: constantly on the lookout for something to simplify. But what we've been doing, we've been
[Guest]: not been doing a very intense job of actually simplifying things in the sense that when we
[Guest]: explain something, it's not exhaustive. It's not insightful, not necessarily insightful. It just
[Guest]: covers, it just gives people and listeners an idea of what it might be. What we do, what is unique to
[Guest]: what we do is we just pepper it with our silly jokes, our observations, and the constant going
[Guest]: off on tangents and recalling anecdotes and things like that, which might happen in a room full of
[Guest]: friends. That was not intentional. So when we started doing Simplified, we used to research
[Guest]: and script out and do everything and it ended up sounding very wooden. And we didn't like
[Guest]: it very much ourselves. And so we decided to have freewheeling things. And it was very clear
[Guest]: to the listener that we knew as little of it as they themselves did, which which sort of added to
[Guest]: the allure. One thing that Simplified, there are two basic things that I really got out of
[Guest]: podcasting. One is you tended to read more and learn more about things and because you wanted to
[Guest]: explain it to someone, you'd be a little more sort of attentive. And the second is my co-host,
[Guest]: now it is a Chuck and Sriketh and Tony, we would have these very nice bonding times together,
[Guest]: because you'd be you know, each one riffs off in their own way. Chuck is like terrific at those
[Guest]: horrible groaner puns that he comes up with and Tony is wordplay based and Sriketh has, you know,
[Guest]: a wealth of anecdotes. So it is that the act of putting that podcast together, you know, it's
[Guest]: really great fun. That's basically what I get out of the podcast. We don't make any money out of it.
[Guest]: And so that never was the intention. But it's just fun putting it together and,
[Guest]: and you know, sort of being together for at least a couple of times a month.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, a couple of things that you said kind of struck me in the sense one thing you said was
[Amit Varma]: that if you read something with the intention of teaching it, of talking about it, you just read
[Amit Varma]: much better, you learn much better. And I think in my episode with Krish Ashok, Ashok rather spoke
[Amit Varma]: about this, as well himself, where, you know, there's a pyramid of learning and the most,
[Amit Varma]: the most inefficient way of learning something is perhaps to read it. And then a slightly better way
[Amit Varma]: if somebody reads it out to you or whatever, and an even better ways to write about it,
[Amit Varma]: and then finally to teach it. And I just feel that that's, you know, so if you if you approach
[Amit Varma]: learning about anything, with the intention or the illusion of an intention that I'm going to
[Amit Varma]: teach this at some point, then you'll find yourself reading that much more carefully,
[Amit Varma]: because you have to break everything down to first principles and basics or, you know,
[Amit Varma]: getting meta as in fact, is the name of Chakshu, which kind of really works. The other thing that
[Amit Varma]: sort of strikes me is when you said that very often we know as little as the listener does,
[Amit Varma]: which is beautiful, and which is another, you know, piece of advice I'd give to creators,
[Amit Varma]: not just podcasters, that one question I got while teaching the course sometimes was that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, why should people listen to me? I am not an expert in anything. I am not like Ram
[Amit Varma]: Guha or Arshad Bhogle or whatever, why should people listen to me? I mean, direct quotes,
[Amit Varma]: people are talking about themselves, you know, and my whole point is that you don't need to be
[Amit Varma]: an expert to be a compelling creator, you just need to be on a journey that many other people
[Amit Varma]: are also on, you know, it could be a physical journey, it could be a journey of a certain kind
[Amit Varma]: of curiosity, you could be at exactly the same intellectual or emotional state as your listeners.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the charm. That's where the empathy comes in. That's where the relatableness comes in.
[Amit Varma]: And after that, all you got to do is be authentic to yourself. But leaving aside these musings,
[Amit Varma]: let's go back to the beginning, because you've heard my show enough to know that I want all
[Amit Varma]: details from childhood. I mean, not all details, but tell me a bit about your childhood. Where
[Guest]: were you born? You know, where did you grow up? I was born in Mangalore, which is where my
[Guest]: mother is from. My parents are from there. And my grandparents live there. So this is a tradition.
[Guest]: I was the first born. So the first born goes and, you know, is delivered in the mother's house.
[Guest]: But we were back in Bombay, almost soon thereafter. And this was because my father was the
[Guest]: oldest in the family. And his mother had passed away at a very young age, had just passed away.
[Guest]: And they wanted, so my father had a younger brother and two, three younger sisters. And
[Guest]: they wanted a woman of the house. So my father got married early. So we lived in a small house
[Guest]: in Vadala. My grandfather had a restaurant. And he was an interesting guy. He had a successful
[Guest]: restaurant and he made a lot of money, relatively speaking. They were poor. And then because of the
[Guest]: restaurant, you know, the entire family and extended family, you know, got settled. My dad
[Guest]: dad was randomly chosen to become a doctor. It is typical for that time. He was rather looking
[Guest]: forward to going and sitting in the restaurant at the gala, you know, counting all the cash.
[Guest]: And around this time, T.M.A. Pai was opening his Kasturba Medical College. And he was looking for
[Guest]: students. So he knew my grandfather and he said, why don't you send your son? And my grandfather
[Guest]: says, yeah, sounds like a good idea. And the next thing my father knows, he is studying medicine.
[Guest]: And so that was how things happened. And when my dad became a doctor, he had to have a practice.
[Guest]: And Vadala was too small, I mean too big and too expensive a place to start a practice. You know,
[Guest]: he had to look around. So a very distant suburb at that time was Malad. So he decided to start
[Guest]: this practice in Malad. And he used to live in Vadala, then practice in Malad and go back. And
[Guest]: he didn't have a very good practice. And one of his friends, he became a friend because they used
[Guest]: to take the same train. And there was literally like four trains a day to Malad or something like
[Guest]: that. And he told him that people want doctors who can make night visits. So if you don't live here,
[Guest]: you are not going to get many patients. Why don't you move here? So he decided to move.
[Guest]: And when I was maybe three or four years old, we moved to Malad. And we lived in a very Marathi
[Guest]: neighborhood. So I am very comfortable with speaking Marathi. Very nice people that we lived
[Guest]: with. It was a different time. Everybody's doors were always open. So you could just wander in
[Guest]: and out of everyone's house, that kind of thing. So growing up, I almost entirely grew up in other
[Guest]: people's houses. There are a lot of really very interesting anecdotes. So the landlady of our
[Guest]: house, she was PL Deshpande's sister. So they were all a very dramatic family. They were like,
[Guest]: you know, every Sunday, they used to sort of, you know, harmoniums would come out, they start
[Guest]: singing, somebody would act something, dance. It was a great time. And around then, so our house,
[Guest]: it was very small. It was a one-bedroom Holland kitchen. And we had any given time, we had about
[Guest]: 10 guests. Because anyone who was coming from Mangalore back then, I'm talking about early
[Guest]: 70s, late 60s, early 70s, would just, you know, they would automatically land up and stay for
[Guest]: indefinite amounts of time. So my father always wanted a bigger house. So then he, you know,
[Guest]: he moved to a place which is now like mainstream Malad. But back then, it was a big mangrove swamp
[Guest]: and our house is right in the middle of the swamp, but it was a big house. And from age 11 or so,
[Guest]: I grew up in pretty much complete solitude. That's when I sort of acquired the reading
[Guest]: habit. There was literally nothing else to do. There was no internet, no TV, nothing,
[Guest]: a bunch of books. And I used to read anything. I mean, I used to read Mills and Boone, Women's,
[Guest]: I was a man, magazine called Women's Era that my mother used to sell. I used to read that from
[Guest]: cover to cover. Reader's Digest was one of my favorite. And I mean, it used to be a pretty nice
[Guest]: little magazine, Reader's Digest, for all the contempt and scorn that it gets now.
[Guest]: And then when I was maybe 12 or 13, I discovered P.G. Woodhouse. So one of my uncles is a big fan.
[Guest]: So I just devoured all those books. And it was a lovely time. Yeah, growing up was mostly reading,
[Guest]: reading, reading and more reading. My father was a doctor and he was a very popular local,
[Guest]: you know, medical practitioner. When I was very young, I remember this was when we used to live
[Guest]: in that other earlier house. My father would, you know, all his collections, everything would be in
[Guest]: cash. So he would go in the morning and deposit into the bank. So that one, that bank was Central
[Guest]: Bank. It was just outside Malar station. And it had a very, you know, I remember the guy's face,
[Guest]: a very majestic looking Parsi manager. His name was Mr. Gandevi. And I used to love him. I was
[Guest]: very small. I was a few, maybe seven, eight years old. And he would always give me a, you know,
[Guest]: toffee or something. And he'd keep addressing me as darling. And he would address everyone as
[Guest]: darling. He would just say, nice guy. And one day when we go there, it's, my father used to go first
[Guest]: thing in the morning because all his evening's collections were deposited in the bank. And then
[Guest]: he would, so he had a scooter. So I would go with him and stand in front of the scooter and go.
[Guest]: And we go to the branch and Mr. Gandevi is standing outside. A whole bunch of people are
[Guest]: standing outside. No one's gone into the branch. That is because there is a big turd lying on the,
[Guest]: on the entrance of the step to the bank. You know, someone's taken a poop. And, you know,
[Guest]: everyone is very, you know, the staff and everyone, we are there and they're like, you know, let's
[Guest]: call someone. Let's get out. But Mr. Gandevi has a loud voice and he's, no, he says, this is,
[Guest]: we have to find out. So he went into Sherlock Holmes mode and he won't know who had done it.
[Guest]: And everyone was, you know, no one really wanted to find out. Do you really want to find out?
[Guest]: Do you find a turd on your, this thing? Do you want to put Mr. Gandevi at it? And I remember,
[Guest]: I remember that ruckus and my father sort of laughing at it, saying that, you know, imagine,
[Guest]: you find, it'll be some homeless guy or a beggar who's done it. You find him, what are you going
[Guest]: to do with him? And then later in life, I realized that a lot of us, we do something very similar.
[Guest]: I've done a lot of you, you end up sort of investigating things, the result of which is
[Guest]: almost never useful to you at all. So, yeah, I just, for some reason, just remembered Mr. Gandevi
[Guest]: and my childhood. It's a very vibrant image. But did Mr. Gandevi get to the bottom of the
[Guest]: mystery turd? Yeah. So he, apparently later, so not when you were there. So my father made the
[Guest]: deposit like the other gentleman. By deposit, you mean a proper cash deposit?
[Guest]: A proper cash deposit. And then we learned that there was a homeless guy or some such nearby.
[Guest]: And Mr. Gandevi, I did give him a year full and sent him along this way. It was, it was dramatic.
[Guest]: We missed it. Yeah, we should, I would have, it would have, I would have been a different person
[Guest]: if I had, you know, if I had got the benefit of that, that thing as well.
[Amit Varma]: This can be such a fascinating start of a humor-cum-crime novel. It's quite lovely. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the thing is people today don't realize how little there was to read in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: it like whenever I'm with a guest of our age, so to say 60s or 70s born, you know, everything they
[Amit Varma]: talk about having read is something that I also read because you didn't have that much to read.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So, you know, in fact, with readers, I just, I remember then they had all these sections,
[Amit Varma]: humor in uniform was one section. And they had, I think, three sections like that of different
[Amit Varma]: kinds of jokes. I forget what the others were. Drama in real life was one.
[Amit Varma]: Haan, there was one, there was something like that. Yeah. And today, of course, we're surrounded by
[Amit Varma]: humor all over the place. And yet this one memory is somehow so incredibly vivid. Was it a big shock
[Amit Varma]: to your system that, you know, in your early years, like you mentioned, you were, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there were people all around you, you know, the Deshpande harmoniums, Deshpande vocals,
[Amit Varma]: kids playing everywhere. But suddenly you're in the middle of a mangrove swamp and you're
[Amit Varma]: reading a lot. Was that kind of a difficult adjustment at some point? Yeah. So I was,
[Guest]: it must have changed me at some level. And I was always the performing kind. So when I was very
[Guest]: small, thanks to, you know, my Marathi neighbors, I knew a lot of these little, you know, little
[Guest]: dramatic acts or scenes from plays and I would do them. Do you remember any now? There was one
[Guest]: little skit that they had, they used to make me do, which was a country bumpkin coming from
[Guest]: Alibaug to Bombay. So he comes and he like, he lands up in Bombay, then he goes to,
[Guest]: on a BST bus and a conductor asks him for a ticket. And this guy thinks he's talking about
[Guest]: a thalipeet and he says, why would I be carrying a thalipeet? I said, not a thalipeet. Thalipeet
[Guest]: is something that you eat. And ticket or something like that. I used to do that. And there was,
[Guest]: you know, it was in that accent and things like that. So these people used to make all of us
[Guest]: children, myself and their children as well, make, perform all these things and sing and dance. And
[Guest]: when we went to our new house, there was literally no one at all. We had a few neighbors, but their
[Guest]: children were either much older or much younger than me. So there was no point in sort of playing
[Guest]: with them. And it must have changed me a lot. I still tend to get carried away when I'm invited to
[Guest]: perform. So Sheila, my wife, finds that very amusing. So, you know, somebody gives me a little
[Guest]: handle and I'm barely singing, dancing, acting or doing whatever it is. And often doing a terrible
[Guest]: job at it, which is basically, I mean, as they say, when we don't dance like no one's watching.
[Guest]: So I'll be, I'm a bit notorious for that in the family. But when I went to this new house,
[Guest]: I became a little more introspective and I got, I got, I had a good fortune of having one uncle
[Guest]: who was very well read and he had a very well stocked library and he would encourage me to read.
[Guest]: So he would also read a lot of Bertrand Russell. So I liked Bertrand Russell's style of writing,
[Guest]: very economical, very, you know, very sort of, you know, very to the point. He didn't waste much,
[Guest]: you know, in terms of words. And a lot of what he wrote was very interesting. So one of the first
[Guest]: books I read of his was a book called Why I'm Not a Christian. You know, it was sort of basically
[Guest]: not Christian. It's just why we shouldn't believe in things unless we have a good reason to believe
[Guest]: in them. And for me, it was, I must have been, I don't know, 12, 13 years old, but it sounded like
[Guest]: eminently good sense. And then I sort of internalized it a little too strongly. And then
[Guest]: I would, you know, talk precociously, you know, when elders were present, and then I would be
[Guest]: rebuked for that as well. And now I see it is oftentimes in bad taste for you to just vigorously
[Guest]: go at someone without knowing any background, challenging all their beliefs. But of course,
[Guest]: you were right and they were wrong. But it was fun. It was, when you discover something new,
[Guest]: radically new way of looking at things, you start thinking about it. And, you know, in life,
[Guest]: there are not many things that make you think. It's not very often that you really think very
[Guest]: hard. And when you do, it's oftentimes very rewarding. So I like that one of the times is
[Guest]: when we were talking and you raised the topic of anti-natalism. So, and then I was thinking about
[Guest]: that. And it made so much sense to me that I became very eloquent. And I think I've made a
[Guest]: strong convert my older son, he keeps saying that he doesn't want to have children. And she's like
[Guest]: completely despairing. What do you mean you're not going to have children? You can't not have
[Guest]: children. What about your wife? What if she doesn't have children, so on and so forth?
[Amit Varma]: Oh, my God, Sheila must be so mad at me. Oh, yeah, she's enemy number one.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, for my listeners, I once wrote a column about my atheism called a congregation
[Amit Varma]: of atheists describing a dinner party, where I asked all the people at the table that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when did you realize you were an atheist? When did you realize you didn't believe in God? And
[Amit Varma]: that was actually at your place. And it was one of those really outlier dinner parties in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that everyone at the table was a non-believer. And I kind of wrote the column on that because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I think because there are militant atheists, people often seem to misunderstand
[Amit Varma]: atheism as similar to a belief system or having an equivalence to a belief system. But as you know,
[Amit Varma]: this famous letter writer to The Economist once wrote that atheism is no more a belief system
[Amit Varma]: than not collecting stamps as a hobby. So you can't say my hobby is not collecting stamps. No,
[Amit Varma]: it's not. So atheism is really the absence of belief rather than a belief that there is no God.
[Amit Varma]: So an atheist does not believe that there is no God. Instead, an atheist simply does not believe
[Amit Varma]: in God. Would if you give him the evidence, but you have to give him convincing evidence. So I
[Amit Varma]: think that's where it comes down from. As for antinatalism, that became controversial because
[Amit Varma]: I remember it was my conversation with you, which set me off into writing that I wrote a column
[Amit Varma]: about how it's immoral to have children, which was a headline, partly tongue in cheek. But I thought
[Amit Varma]: the argument I made there was fairly solid in the sense that, look, all of us know that we shouldn't
[Amit Varma]: do anything without other people's consent. We shouldn't hurt other people and we shouldn't kill
[Amit Varma]: other people. I think all three of these are fairly obvious. But when we choose to have children,
[Amit Varma]: we are basically bringing people into this planet without their consent, which is, of course,
[Amit Varma]: impossible when they're guaranteed to suffer and they're guaranteed to die. So can that possibly
[Amit Varma]: be ethical? I mean, they had no choice in the matter. They were kind of just put there.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, the common arguments. And I don't actually buy the earlier utilitarian argument
[Amit Varma]: about it, that the world is full of pain and suffering or look at climate change. Why bring
[Amit Varma]: children into this world? And I don't buy those arguments because my thinking is from a utilitarian.
[Amit Varma]: Utilitarianism breaks down because you can't measure nothing, right? It's just subjective
[Amit Varma]: how you choose to measure happiness or pain or whatever. But this is a clear cut case that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you're making, you know, somebody will suffer and somebody will die. And it's because of
[Guest]: you. And there was no consent involved. If that person is okay with it, that's fine.
[Guest]: But if he's not, there's no way you can reverse that. So you did not take his consent. So his or
[Guest]: her consent. So you have no right to actually, I don't see how that. And so the main argument that
[Guest]: people say is what will happen to a species? I really don't know. I mean, it's, it's just not
[Guest]: morally right to have children. That's all. It's a species will probably die. Everyone thinks like
[Guest]: this. Yes, we won't have any more children. And yes, it'll, it'll be terrible if you are the last
[Guest]: person, right? So everyone dies, and you are the last person on the last one of the human race.
[Guest]: And then it's not going to be pleasant. But none of that has any bearing on the main argument with
[Amit Varma]: that it is not moral to have children. You know, at the species level, I also think of that
[Amit Varma]: whole artificial intelligence argument where people will get alarmist and say that,
[Amit Varma]: oh, you know, AI will eventually take over all of us. And there's a whole paperclip maximizer thing.
[Amit Varma]: And you heard of the paperclip maximizer? No, I haven't. Okay, so the paperclip maximizer is
[Amit Varma]: basically a thought experiment. And the idea of the thought experiment is that imagine if you
[Amit Varma]: make a machine, which is programmed to optimize the making of paperclips, right? That's what you
[Amit Varma]: tell the machine that make as many paperclips as you can. And then the machine goes out of whack.
[Amit Varma]: And it starts turning everything into paperclips like this table, my laptop, the bookshelf starts
[Amit Varma]: turning everything till it starts turning human beings into paperclips, because it's just optimized
[Amit Varma]: for at one thing. And then it goes haywire. And basically the entire universe is just paperclips
[Amit Varma]: and humans are no more in the picture. That's kind of the thought experiment. I find it kind
[Amit Varma]: of alarmist and I find so a couple of points I just want to make about the alarmist AI people
[Amit Varma]: is that when you talk of AI in the future, it's always either it seems magical, or it seems sort
[Amit Varma]: of dystopian, like in this case. But the point is that when AI actually happens, you immediately
[Amit Varma]: take it for granted and it makes your life better off. Like the very fact that, you know, we are
[Amit Varma]: talking right now we are doing a backup recording of a thing as well. Our audio is going into this,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there's so much AI involved everywhere. You know, you had you taken an Uber to come here,
[Amit Varma]: that's AI. A friend of ours once said that, you know, the new generation being born today will
[Amit Varma]: never know what it is to be lost. Yes, because of maps, which is AI. Everything around us is AI,
[Amit Varma]: we take it completely for granted. In fact, the sponsors of this episode Intel used AI to optimize
[Amit Varma]: water supply and distribution in Washington DC when they were asked to do so. So and that's an
[Amit Varma]: unseen effect, right? That you are getting your 24 hours water and it's clean and whatever and it's
[Amit Varma]: optimized and you're getting it at the lowest price you possibly could and there's AI behind
[Amit Varma]: that. It's like, you know, the invisible hand behind the invisible hand. But that's a digression.
[Amit Varma]: What I was kind of getting at is a species point where earlier you said that when people give that
[Amit Varma]: species argument, if you don't have children, species will die and you're like, why should I
[Amit Varma]: care about the species? And my point there is that a sufficiently advanced AI at some point in time
[Amit Varma]: is going to turn around and tell humans that listen, you know, we are smarter than you in
[Amit Varma]: every possible freaking way. So ethically, why should we be lower than you? Why should we be
[Amit Varma]: your slaves? You know, why should it not be the other way around? And could that happen? And my
[Amit Varma]: point is, I find delight in that thought that if it happens, so be it. You know, what is so freaking
[Amit Varma]: sacred about the species? Just about humanity. Yeah. It's that famous Douglas Adams quote
[Amit Varma]: about the puddle. Do you remember that? No. Yeah. So Douglas Adams once wrote, quote,
[Amit Varma]: imagine a puddle waking up one morning and thinking, this is an interesting world I find
[Amit Varma]: myself in, an interesting hole I find myself in. Fits me rather neatly, doesn't it? In fact,
[Amit Varma]: it fits me staggeringly well. Must have been made to have me in it. Stop quote. Stop quote within
[Amit Varma]: the quote. Adams continues, this is such a powerful idea that as the sun rises in the sky
[Amit Varma]: and the air heats up and as gradually the puddle gets smaller and smaller, he's still frantically
[Amit Varma]: hanging on to the notion that everything's going to be all right, because this world was meant to
[Amit Varma]: have him in it, was built to have him in it. So the moment he disappears, catches him rather by
[Amit Varma]: surprise. I think this may be something we need to be on the watch out for. Stop quote. You know,
[Guest]: you read that book, every time you read it, you find out something new. And this is, you know,
[Guest]: that anthropocentric view of the world. We are hardwired for that. Everything, all of religion,
[Guest]: everything is because of that. And it takes a great deal of sort of learning to accept that
[Guest]: it might not be the case. So that was the basic argument against the antenatal point of view.
[Guest]: The central argument, which was basically consent, is lost. And you're talking about
[Guest]: what will happen to the world, what will happen to the human. So that's not the argument at all.
[Guest]: And it's not even, it's just a moral position. And wow, crazy. It takes a lot for someone like
[Guest]: Amit Verma and Narendra Sinha to be surprised. But some one such thing just happened for the
[Guest]: benefit of the listeners is on the 27th floor, we got a person, a visitor outside the window
[Guest]: said hi and went down. Apparently he was cleaning the windows from the outside.
[Amit Varma]: Today the building society sent us a notice on the special building app in the morning
[Amit Varma]: that the facade of this side is kind of going to get cleaned. And initially I thought it's
[Amit Varma]: some kind of narrative management. They're going to clean the facade, but then they're literally
[Amit Varma]: cleaning the facade. So, you know, this is interesting to me, what you just said about
[Amit Varma]: reading Bertrand Russell at that age and kind of realizing, you know, that light bulb going off,
[Amit Varma]: and then it's, you know, going on rather. And once it's on, it's going on forever because
[Amit Varma]: becoming the person I am in intellectual terms took a lot longer. Like at that age,
[Amit Varma]: I would probably have believed in a fuzzy way that there is a greater force out there and
[Amit Varma]: nonsense. And equally, just in terms of ideology, I would have been, I mean, I remember going to
[Amit Varma]: college with, you know, marks in my handbag, can you imagine? Because it's like fashionable,
[Amit Varma]: and you feel cool. And it's like, it sounds right, right? It sounds compassionate and
[Amit Varma]: how the world should be. And then over a period of years, one kind of gradually
[Amit Varma]: starts thinking more clearly about things. And that's how one arrives at atheism and the respect
[Amit Varma]: for consent, which is basically what my whole ideological underpinning anyway is.
[Amit Varma]: So what was it like for you? So, you know, you're an atheist from an early age, so much so that
[Amit Varma]: you're arguing with elders, though that of course has a pleasure of its own, because you can take
[Amit Varma]: those judgmental positions I know better than these old fools. But, you know, when you look
[Amit Varma]: back at yourself as a young person, what were the things about you that you look back on with
[Amit Varma]: disapproval, which have changed since? And you look back, and you say that, shit, I can't believe
[Amit Varma]: I was that person or I did those things. Because with me, there's a whole laundry list of almost
[Guest]: everything. Yeah, same here. I mean, virtually everything. So one of the things I'm sure you'll
[Guest]: agree as well, is you don't realize things unless something happens, makes you think, you think
[Guest]: really hard, and you figure it out. And once it's figured out, it stays with you forever. So those
[Guest]: are the central tenets of whatever. So whenever you talk about doing everything from first principles,
[Guest]: I can relate to that. And I know that that's very fallible as well, because you cannot figure out
[Guest]: everything from first principles. Life is too complex for that. Yet, because you've always,
[Guest]: you know, arrived at the big conclusions of your life, by figuring it out on your own,
[Guest]: you're sort of addicted to that. And you're not comfortable with sort of entertaining an idea,
[Guest]: unless you've sort of figured it out, played it over in your head, stretched it out, mangled it,
[Guest]: done whatever it is, and found it to be acceptable to whatever the rest of your belief system is.
[Guest]: And many of our mutual friends are like that. We figure that out. Then a lot of that also comes
[Guest]: into conflict with the world you live in. Now, I don't wear atheism on my sleeve. I go to temple,
[Guest]: I pray, I genuflect, I do everything. Because I think that respect to the tribe and being kind to
[Guest]: other people is more important than trying to transform everyone to your belief system. And
[Guest]: however much I might be convinced that I'm thinking right, you know, it's not universal.
[Guest]: And there's really no reason for me to believe that I am. My belief system, as you said,
[Guest]: is sceptic, right? So I do not believe unless there is a good reason to believe in something.
[Guest]: But if someone else finds believing easier, I'm now of the view that I'm really not a person to
[Guest]: you know, say no to that. I've been accused by actually my kids of being too like that it's a
[Guest]: cop out that you know that I'm copying out when if I'm, you know, if I really believe in something,
[Guest]: I should go out and say it. Why do I? And I'm conflicted about that. I'm not sure why I do
[Guest]: that. But the older I get, the less willing I am to sort of aggressively go and try and change
[Guest]: someone else's point of view. I don't know if that's the right thing or not. But a lot of things
[Guest]: that are happening around me at this time, I do feel that I must go out and I do it on an individual
[Guest]: level. Recently, there was a classmate who exhibited, you know, very xenophobic views,
[Guest]: which I didn't agree with. And I called him out on that. And, you know, I was risking our
[Guest]: friendship, but I couldn't not do it. Yet, I find myself unwilling to do it with the world
[Guest]: at large. I haven't figured that one out why I do it. In your line of work as well, because you are,
[Guest]: you know, basically a journalist, even if you're not an active one, when you report on things as
[Guest]: you see it, regardless of whether those things are palatable to the rest of the world or not.
[Guest]: And do you find yourself being more temperate in these things? I for one feel you are. Your
[Guest]: earlier writings were far more direct and far more brutal than they are now. What do you think
[Guest]: is your journey or your experience in this? Yeah, that's a good question. They're tempered
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that there is not a conscious self-censorship, but there is also a realization
[Amit Varma]: in a sense that social media takes up too much of your time and too much of your mind space.
[Amit Varma]: So do you really want to get into a fight on Twitter, for example, which is going to leave
[Amit Varma]: you disturbed for two, three days because people are going to come and they're going to abuse you
[Amit Varma]: and it's just going to be nuts? Or do you just want to avoid the fight by not saying whatever
[Amit Varma]: it is in the moment? So I have found that there, I think at least as far as Twitter is concerned,
[Amit Varma]: which is an incredibly toxic place, it amplifies toxicity because number one, it's shallow.
[Amit Varma]: You cannot possibly have a deep conversation there per se. So I just use it for broadcasting
[Amit Varma]: my links and not for having conversations, but also because you have these ideological groups,
[Amit Varma]: which are vocal minorities, the bucks and the vokes, the bucks and the vokes, I said the vokes,
[Amit Varma]: vokes, not vokes, the bucks and the vokes. And within these echo chambers, you have people
[Amit Varma]: constantly signaling to raise their status. And how do you do this? One, by showing off your own
[Amit Varma]: virtue, but two, also by attacking others, attacking people from the other side and never
[Amit Varma]: addressing the argument, but always a person or two, attacking people on your own side who are
[Amit Varma]: not pure enough for you. And it's just this constant mad war, which is always fought in
[Amit Varma]: bad faith. You know, you are never addressing the argument. You'll always pick some random word from
[Amit Varma]: some tweet somebody wrote and kind of attack that. And do you really want to go there? And
[Amit Varma]: what kind of also happens in many of these groups is that once they decide to get after your
[Amit Varma]: particular tribe, either of these two tribes, you know, there'll be WhatsApp groups where they'll be
[Amit Varma]: coordinating and it'll just be your notifications will completely get flooded. And what I realized
[Amit Varma]: is a very small vocal minority, you know, thanks to how this podcast does and what I get to hear
[Amit Varma]: from its listeners and all the people who signed up for my writing course and all, I've subsequently
[Amit Varma]: realized over a period of time that the vast majority of people out there are really sensible.
[Amit Varma]: They are also sick of these freaking tribes, but these tribes are so incredibly vocal that sometimes
[Amit Varma]: it is just not worth it. Just let it be. Why do you want to kind of get there? Because and you
[Amit Varma]: can't say anything nuanced or complicated on Twitter, for example. And now the point is most
[Amit Varma]: of these people on either of these two tribes I know won't listen to my podcast and they won't
[Amit Varma]: because perhaps they don't have the attention span or it is their inherent stupidity that drives
[Amit Varma]: them into those tribes to begin with. I'm just kidding. But they probably haven't got gotten
[Amit Varma]: this far to listen to me say this. So it doesn't matter. So on my podcast time, like my whole
[Amit Varma]: thesis for my podcast is that explore everything, question everything. It's a whole skeptic thing.
[Amit Varma]: Like I have changed my mind on quite a few things in a very public way over a period of time over
[Amit Varma]: conversations. I think that's a delightful part of it. Everybody is engaging in good faith.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the one reason like somebody said, why don't you invite a politician from the ruling
[Amit Varma]: party? And the thing is, because if I could invite a politician from the ruling party,
[Amit Varma]: but they're going to come with prepared soundbites and a particular line and they won't really open
[Amit Varma]: up. And the point is, when two people are sitting and they just open up, they trust each other,
[Amit Varma]: they have a conversation and good faith. It's just much more meaningful for everybody concerned
[Amit Varma]: rather than it's a polar opposite of what you see in television. But I'm and also, you know,
[Amit Varma]: while I was editing the magazine Pragati for a couple of years, 2017 to 2019, one of my main
[Amit Varma]: rule I'd set for myself as an editor was that we will only talk about ideas and policies,
[Amit Varma]: we will not talk about people or parties, we will not personalize, we'll just talk about ideas.
[Amit Varma]: So, for example, if I'm going to talk about Savarkar, then I can write about what a horrible
[Amit Varma]: book Hindutva is and engage with the ideas and just talk about those ideas and diss them.
[Amit Varma]: This current battle that you see on Twitter, where one side is like Savarkar was the real
[Amit Varma]: father of the nation and the other side is that he was a, you know, a coward who sided with the
[Amit Varma]: British and who killed Gandhi or whatever, for which there's no basis really. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: why are you entering that debate? It doesn't matter. He's dead. Why do we discuss people all
[Amit Varma]: the time? In fact, every time I get attacked, it's me being discussed. It's not as if I put an idea
[Amit Varma]: out there and someone is disagreeing with it. Though sometimes ideas like that column I wrote
[Amit Varma]: about not having kids, like my God, I never thought I'll get trolled and abused for it as
[Amit Varma]: much as I did. Because parents everywhere felt personally attacked, which wasn't the intention
[Amit Varma]: at all. It's just an intellectual exercise. Let's think about this. Let's tease this out.
[Guest]: I was, someone attacked me. He says, you have two sons of your own. How dare you say that? I said,
[Guest]: I didn't know better at that time. Had I, you know, had I had this insight,
[Guest]: back then I wouldn't have children. I'm just, you know, and I'm not saying you shouldn't have
[Guest]: children. I'm just saying that I think it's morally wrong. That's all. I might be wrong.
[Guest]: But, so this is the thing. So I found that most people are, they feel very uncomfortable
[Guest]: to have their minds changed about anything. And that's, that's the reason why they go into echo
[Guest]: chambers. And that's why people like you and me like to engage with people who have views different
[Guest]: or, you know, at least substantially different from our own. And in some subjects, it is not
[Guest]: possible for us to be different on everything. And that makes it interesting. And one of two
[Guest]: things happen, one of three things, actually. One is that it's inconclusive. Second is you
[Guest]: are convinced that that person is right or that person is convinced that you are right. So for
[Guest]: these things to happen, both people need to have reasonably open minds. And that's vanishingly
[Guest]: rare these days, at least on Twitter and all, it's very, very rare. Really no point in debating
[Guest]: anything. Regardless of how you're saying that Twitter, first of all, it is that 280 characters
[Guest]: is really not conducive to any kind of argument. But even if it were not, it would still be
[Guest]: impossible to change many people's minds because they are not willing to have it changed.
[Guest]: I believe Clubhouse and Twitter space is the vocal part of the audio part of this thing, which
[Guest]: should be very, very suitable for, you know, opinion changing experiences. I'm told they've
[Guest]: become huge echo chamber. I was I've stopped listening to them because I didn't like the way
[Guest]: they were echo chambers. They were just everyone saying the same thing in different thing.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I think and I mentioned this in previous episodes that what I am firm about and
[Amit Varma]: dogmatic about is my values. There are things I value individual freedom, rights, whatever,
[Amit Varma]: skepticism, rationalism, I value those, but I'm completely open on facts. So if I believe X,
[Amit Varma]: Y, Z to be a fact, and you prove me wrong, I'm fine. I'll instantly, you know, once the evidence
[Amit Varma]: is solid, even on a question of there being God, but obviously, there isn't so far because people
[Amit Varma]: have tried for centuries to get proof of that. But what I find disturbing is that people are
[Amit Varma]: so dogmatic about what they consider the facts of the world, and then you simply cannot question
[Guest]: them. You know, like, especially historical facts, right? So yeah, so those also are open to
[Guest]: interpretation open and slight adjustments in historical facts paint entirely different
[Guest]: pictures of entire cultures. And wisdom lies in realizing that there is really nothing. There's a
[Guest]: very nice Tom Robbins quote saying that a historian is very much like an animal husbandriest. Have you
[Guest]: heard this quote? No. So the similarity is that one breeds animals and the other breeds facts,
[Guest]: and both of them are ankle deep in bullshit. So that's an important thing to know about all
[Guest]: historical things. It's agenda driven. Whoever wrote the history had some reason to highlight
[Guest]: some facts and obfuscate others. And it's really extremely juvenile to have any kind of fights
[Guest]: based on history. And yet almost every fight that I see on social media now is somehow connected to
[Guest]: history or historical opinion or historical fact or counterfactuals. What would have happened if
[Guest]: this hadn't happened? It's just really not something. It's an interesting topic to discuss
[Guest]: over an evening drink, but really nothing that merits serious discussion. And how does it make
[Amit Varma]: a material difference to anyone whether Aryans invaded or migrated or whether they came spread
[Amit Varma]: out? How does it make a freaking difference to anyone? I mean, you don't have a job. There's
[Amit Varma]: no food on your table. You know, people are being lynched outside your doorstep. And you're talking
[Amit Varma]: about something that happened 1000s of years ago. By the way, you sort of mentioned earlier about
[Amit Varma]: skepticism about always questioning and avoiding certainties, which is really wise. And that
[Amit Varma]: reminded me of one of my favorite films of all time. So I got to recommend it. In fact, it's not
[Amit Varma]: a film. It's a it's a series like when you know, people talk about what's your favorite web series
[Amit Varma]: of all time and all that. The first one that comes to mind is a wire. But even above that
[Amit Varma]: is Krzysztof Kielowski's Dekalog, which is a series he made for Polish television in the early
[Amit Varma]: 90s. It's a series of 10 one hour films on the 10 commandments. And the first of those is I think
[Amit Varma]: something to the effect of you shall worship no other God but me. Right. And it's a beautiful
[Amit Varma]: story. And I'll just say it out here, even though it's like a spoiler, but I'll just say it because
[Amit Varma]: it's so beautiful. And I want you to watch the whole series anyway. It's like my favorite
[Amit Varma]: cinematic Dekalog. Dekalog it's called. And the first story there based on this commandment
[Amit Varma]: is about, you know, it's freezing cold. And the lake is kind of frozen, but it's not reached that
[Amit Varma]: stage where people are skating on it yet. They're kind of waiting, waiting, waiting. And this kid
[Amit Varma]: really wants to skate. And his father is kind of just like us, a rationalist and an actual scientist
[Amit Varma]: and like us, and like me. And so what he does is he takes a temperature and he looks at,
[Amit Varma]: he puts all kinds of data together to figure out when it is safe for his son to go skating.
[Amit Varma]: And then he arrives at something which after all margins of errors and all he's saying,
[Amit Varma]: it is absolutely safe for you to go skating. Now the ice will be frozen solid and the sun goes
[Amit Varma]: and you can guess what happens next. And yeah, he's gone. And the next day, the father is standing
[Amit Varma]: this consulate by the edge, wondering what the hell happened. All his numbers were right. All
[Amit Varma]: his science was right. How could this have happened? And then in the distance, he sees a
[Amit Varma]: homeless man besides the lake, warming his hands over a fire. And that tells you the complexity
[Amit Varma]: of the world. And the way I kind of interpret that is that you respect the complexities,
[Amit Varma]: you respect the multitudes. Thou shalt have no other God than me is not a literal invocation
[Amit Varma]: to a real God that exists, but a sort of a more metaphorical look at just complexity of the world
[Amit Varma]: and avoid certainties, therefore, which we often get caught up in. You know, you can't plan
[Guest]: everything you can't. I have to watch this take a log or something. If this is the kind of filmmaking
[Amit Varma]: that is happening, it's no, it's just gorgeous filmmaking at every level. Like to me, it's like
[Amit Varma]: the epitome of cinema, but whatever, I always kind of get sentimental when I think of Kieslowski,
[Amit Varma]: because there's such great films. Let's talk about your moving on from the childhood. Like at this
[Amit Varma]: point, when you're a kid, what are you dreaming of being? I'm very curious about this because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, back in the day, there's nothing right? There's no and I grew up, I'm just a few years
[Amit Varma]: younger than you, though I think of us as being more or less in the same age group, late 40s,
[Amit Varma]: mid 50s. What is the difference now? But back in the day, there was really nothing much. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: I was privileged enough to have books at my disposal and whatever. And but the one TV set
[Amit Varma]: just got you Krishi Darshan once a week. Yeah, you know, so what were your early dreams? What was your view
[Guest]: of the world and your place in it? Yeah, so I, my father was a doctor, and he was, he had a successful
[Guest]: practice. And it was assumed that I would become a doctor as well. So even I didn't question it.
[Guest]: But I didn't. So you had this 10 standard and 12 standard and things of that. And
[Guest]: back in the day, so someone I was talking to my nephew actually about a series on Amazon,
[Guest]: he recommended called the Kota Factory on people preparing for the IIT. And I haven't watched it,
[Guest]: but I was reminiscing about my time. In my time, it was something called Agarwal classes.
[Guest]: So Agarwal classes was, you know, it was the top the slogan was ideal for scholars. So they are
[Guest]: coaching classes. But, you know, in back in my time, only people who are really weak at studies
[Guest]: would go to coaching classes, otherwise they wouldn't. Whereas this one, you know, you you went
[Guest]: if you're good at it. Anyway, I managed to get into Agarwal classes. And I would go all the way
[Guest]: from Malad to Dadar, which is far away. And it was prestigious. So not everyone got into I,
[Guest]: there were two flavors, there was something called a vacation batch with the absolute toppers went to,
[Guest]: which I didn't make it to. And there was a regular batch, which was hard to get in,
[Guest]: but it was like, okay for models like me. So anyway, I managed to get in and I went there.
[Guest]: And I found that it was just the same thing being repeated over and over and over again.
[Guest]: And so you know, if you're done calculus, they'll tell you like you have to do like a
[Guest]: you know, differentiate x cubed, so it is 3x squared. And that's it. Then, you know, if you
[Guest]: want to differentiate x to the power four, it's four. And they just keep teaching you that over
[Guest]: and over and over again. It just, it just, you know, it just froke me out. I couldn't handle
[Guest]: after two months of this, I came and told my parents, there is no way I could, you know,
[Guest]: I'm not going to Agarwal again. And to their credit, they said, okay, son, if you don't want
[Guest]: to go, you study, prepare at home and study. Do try to get into medicine, because it will be nice
[Guest]: and you can take away your father's practice. And I tried, I didn't get enough marks, I probably
[Guest]: wasn't motivated. And then I was much better at math. So somebody, you know, my mother actually,
[Guest]: she said, you know, you either have to become a doctor or an engineer, I'm not going to have you,
[Guest]: you know, sort of doing some liberal arts thing. I was very keen on doing
[Guest]: liberal arts, but she said, no, nothing doing. And so I went, even for engineering, I didn't have
[Guest]: the marks to get into one of the top colleges in Bombay, but I went to Manipal, which was,
[Guest]: you had my father to pay a little donation. And luckily for me, I liked that. I took to it.
[Guest]: If you don't like mathematics of a certain kind, engineering is extremely, you know,
[Guest]: you know, tedious, because it's there, it's omnipresent. You have calculus everywhere
[Guest]: and everything. I mean, if you're studying thermodynamics, there's calculus. Heat transfer,
[Guest]: there's calculus. Every damn thing, there is some calculus or the other. And there were people in
[Guest]: my class who hated calculus and hated mathematics and they were miserable. But it was a generational
[Guest]: thing. Parents really didn't ask their children what they wanted to become. So no one asked me
[Guest]: what I wanted to become. Luckily for me, engineering was good. I met a lot of really
[Guest]: cool people. So they were all guys like me. A lot of them were very intelligent, well-read.
[Guest]: They had ideas of their own. They were good debates. It was fun. And it must have sort of
[Guest]: molded me as a person. When you go to an engineering college hostel or any hostel,
[Guest]: you're basically out of your parents' shadows. And anyone else can say or do anything to you.
[Guest]: They are not restricted. You don't have parents to sort of protect you or anything like that.
[Guest]: So there are some nice people, there are some nasty people. And this is a human thing. We have
[Guest]: grown up in societies for all of our human history. You adapt, you make some friends,
[Guest]: you make some foes and you actually make far many more friends than foes. And you grow as a person.
[Guest]: Manipal was a transformational time in my life. By the end of that, I was still unclear as to
[Guest]: what I wanted to become. One of my roommates, he had actually bought a firm for this MBA course.
[Guest]: It was called MMS back then. And that was Mumbai University. So Bajaj, SPJ and all these were there.
[Guest]: And he got a job in Siemens, which was like a really good job to have. So straight out of
[Guest]: college, he got a job in Siemens. So he wasn't interested in going for this MBA. But he had
[Guest]: spent a hundred rupees for the firm. So he offered to sell me the firm for 50 rupees. So I bought the
[Guest]: firm from him in order to win the transaction. I bought it for 50 rupees. And then because I had...
[Amit Varma]: Okay, should we pause? For the listeners, we'll pause for a moment because outside my window,
[Amit Varma]: there is a window cleaner on the 27th floor. And I'm probably more nervous than he is right now.
[Guest]: I'm actually afraid of heights. So this has to be the scariest job in the world for me.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe he's looking in and thinking, I like to be alone by myself. These
[Amit Varma]: people are speaking on a mic. Must be the scariest job in the world for me.
[Guest]: We have a full-time guy who does all this. So he used to be a painter and he's done all this.
[Guest]: So he's completely fearless when it comes to... So once we got locked out of our house,
[Guest]: so he went into the other floor. He climbed up through the balcony and I was like...
[Guest]: And he was absolutely nonchalant about it. Just like a couple of minutes, he was into the house.
[Amit Varma]: So the window cleaner has gone down to the 26th floor, where it is presumably a little safer.
[Guest]: And warmer also. The 27th floor is colder and it's probably...
[Amit Varma]: Boss, the AC is on, so I'm sure not as cool as that.
[Guest]: What were we talking about? I was rambling on.
[Amit Varma]: College and the friends you made.
[Guest]: I was talking about SPJN. So my roommate sold me the MBA form for 50 rupees and I filled it out
[Guest]: only because I had paid 50 rupees for it. And the next thing I know, I'm doing an MBA.
[Guest]: And it's one of the top colleges in India now, SPJN, Institute of Management and Research.
[Guest]: But I was underwhelmed, to say the least, because I had no real context.
[Guest]: I wasn't commercially minded. Business didn't turn me on.
[Guest]: And it was... So one thing about management and the entire field of management education,
[Guest]: I call it, quote unquote, is it's a lot of post-hoc rationalization.
[Guest]: So something happens and then a bunch of people sit together and decide why it succeeded.
[Guest]: So that time it was Sony Walkman and Sony Mockman.
[Guest]: And you had marketing professors say that if you want anything to succeed,
[Guest]: it has to be what the consumer wants and you have to figure out what the consumer needs.
[Guest]: And then... And I was like, you know, Sony Walkman never existed before.
[Guest]: How could anyone in the world know that it is so?
[Guest]: I really couldn't understand how that was any kind of insightful.
[Guest]: Anyway, so I got an MBA job out of my college. It was a nice job. I mean, well-paying and everything.
[Guest]: But very little to do. So all day would be hanging around in office and chatting.
[Guest]: You would have a few meetings and so... But most of the time there wasn't much work.
[Guest]: Computers weren't popular.
[Guest]: So you had one computer, it will usually be in the managing director's cabin.
[Guest]: And it would be for the exclusive purpose of playing solitaire.
[Guest]: So that kind of thing.
[Guest]: But because of the lack of activity, I was going nuts.
[Guest]: So I spent a couple of years there just basically not doing anything.
[Guest]: So I decided to go back to engineering route.
[Guest]: So I had a friend who was...
[Guest]: We just met up one day and he was also feeling very blue.
[Guest]: And we decided to start a factory.
[Guest]: And then we started a small mechanical engineering workshop.
[Guest]: They would make dyes and tools for other companies.
[Guest]: And then progress to making components, which would supply some components to Bajaj Auto and to Videocon.
[Guest]: And there were ups and downs.
[Guest]: But basically, it was manufacturing all the way.
[Guest]: And I sort of enjoyed that a lot.
[Guest]: It's a very hard way to make money.
[Guest]: Because manufacturing in our country is much better now.
[Guest]: Back in the day, we had a lot of very restrictive laws.
[Guest]: Central excise was one of the really, really bad...
[Guest]: Everyone bellyaches about GST now.
[Guest]: But GST regime is far more logical and easy to handle than excise.
[Guest]: Excise was harassment on steroids.
[Guest]: Every time you sent material from your factory, you couldn't breathe easily until it actually reached its destination.
[Guest]: There were all kinds of preventive excise officers who could stop your vehicle on the road anywhere
[Guest]: and summon you there if they found any discrepancy in the documents.
[Guest]: There were a lot of things.
[Guest]: So, then some people would harass you for bribery and things like that.
[Guest]: The GST regime has sorted out a lot of that.
[Guest]: But back in the day, those challenges were there.
[Guest]: But even so, it was fun.
[Guest]: I mean, you're always making things.
[Guest]: You're finding new ways of making things.
[Guest]: It was satisfying.
[Guest]: There would be one way of making this widget and it would cost 10 rupees.
[Guest]: And then you figure out a new and cheaper way of making that widget for 9 rupees 50 paisa.
[Guest]: And then you got an extra profit of 50 paisa and that was sweet.
[Guest]: Other people figured out what you've done and then the price of the thing became 9 rupees 50 paisa.
[Guest]: So, you had to figure it out.
[Guest]: So, it was a lot of little innovation.
[Guest]: Jugaad kind of innovation some of the time.
[Guest]: And for me, I had the advantage.
[Guest]: Most of my competitors were not professionally qualified engineers.
[Guest]: So, I could read and those days internet wasn't so common.
[Guest]: So, I used to sort of go.
[Guest]: There was this British Council library in Nariman Point.
[Guest]: Go there, refer.
[Guest]: You'd find easier and better ways of making things.
[Guest]: And that was it.
[Guest]: It was fun.
[Guest]: Luckily for me, I wasn't entirely financially dependent on my business.
[Guest]: I mean, I didn't have to spend any money on rent and things used to go along.
[Guest]: So, I wasn't very competitive in that way.
[Guest]: I never had any ambition.
[Guest]: I didn't want to become, you know, fortune 500 company or anything like that.
[Guest]: And that wish was granted.
[Guest]: I never became a fortune 500 company.
[Guest]: But it was mostly fun all the way.
[Guest]: So, an engineering sort of, you know, career was that way satisfying.
[Guest]: What it was not is it did not give a sense of achievement.
[Guest]: Like, you have these little moments of cleverness where you figure out some better way of doing something.
[Guest]: But it's always very, very incremental.
[Guest]: At least in this country, you never get the opportunity of doing something radically different.
[Guest]: Why do you say at least in this country?
[Guest]: I know other places you have.
[Guest]: We just made, you made a coffee for me in, you know, using the AeroPress.
[Guest]: So, the guy who invented the AeroPress did something and he had the intellectual protection
[Guest]: and he made a lot of money.
[Guest]: So, that does two things.
[Guest]: It, you know, it gives him more power to do other things.
[Guest]: It inspires other people to look for, you know, ways of doing other things.
[Guest]: In India, we don't have that protection.
[Guest]: So, if someone were to invent an AeroPress in India, it would be copied literally within days of it coming out.
[Guest]: That's why we don't have much innovation.
[Guest]: We still do, but the innovators are not well rewarded.
[Guest]: So, we don't have an ecosystem of innovation.
[Guest]: This is what I feel.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me more about how, like the engineering part of it, I get it.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you're essentially, in any case, you're a person who loves tinkering, taking things apart,
[Amit Varma]: coming up with ideas for things.
[Amit Varma]: And I can imagine why that sense of achievement may not be there for incremental stuff,
[Amit Varma]: because so much of it is unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Like you said, if you, you know, find a way to make something that costs 10 rupees for 9.50
[Amit Varma]: and you make it for 9.50 and then everyone copies you and they make it for 9.50.
[Amit Varma]: The benefit to society is actually enormous because all those extra 50 paisas go out into the economy,
[Amit Varma]: you know, create more jobs.
[Amit Varma]: It's a positive sum game.
[Amit Varma]: But it's not noticed by you.
[Amit Varma]: All you see is that I have done so much work and everybody's brought it down.
[Amit Varma]: We've kind of lost that.
[Amit Varma]: So, I get the joy of engineering that's there.
[Amit Varma]: But the business side of it is not so much joy there.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about what those times were like,
[Amit Varma]: because in a sense, in terms of regulatory environment,
[Amit Varma]: you've come from pre-liberalization all the way to now,
[Amit Varma]: through all the many different phases and all that.
[Amit Varma]: You pointed out how you would constantly be stressed because of the excise regime and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So, what was it like?
[Amit Varma]: Like, what really was ease of doing business like back in the day?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I'll give you an example, okay?
[Guest]: So, there was this, so we used to supply to Videocon television.
[Guest]: So, our items were pretty much standard.
[Guest]: There was something called tuner mounting bracket in heat sinks.
[Guest]: So, tuner mounting bracket was, you know, you just mount a tuner.
[Guest]: There was another company in the vicinity which used to make brackets and stuff.
[Guest]: Videocon, another company called Videocon Appliances.
[Guest]: They used to make washing machines and air conditioners.
[Guest]: Now, washing machines had an excise duty, I think, of 0% or 5% or something,
[Guest]: because it was a household thing.
[Guest]: And air conditioner had, I think, 50% or 100% or something.
[Guest]: And the bracket was, I mean, you know, it looked pretty much the same.
[Guest]: So, it's a bracket.
[Guest]: You mount the machine on that bracket and that goes somewhere.
[Guest]: So, there is one kind of bracket which goes under washing machine.
[Guest]: There's another kind which goes under an air conditioner.
[Guest]: So, one of the popular things for the excise officers to catch you on was classification.
[Guest]: So, they would say that you have purposely classified something for a lower tax rate
[Guest]: just in order to evade taxes,
[Guest]: and then slap you with all kinds of back, you know, penal taxes and things like that.
[Guest]: And the process was also the punishment.
[Guest]: So, they would impound your books.
[Guest]: They would seal your factory.
[Guest]: It used to be called seizing.
[Guest]: They used to seize the books.
[Guest]: And once they seized everything, you couldn't even supply.
[Guest]: So, there was, I knew the other guy in our vicinity,
[Guest]: because oftentimes, Video Con used to have the same transporter for both our goods,
[Guest]: it used to go into roughly the same location.
[Guest]: So, the guy would come to our place, pick up our material, go there.
[Guest]: And sometimes, he would request us that, you know, you fill your goods first,
[Guest]: because mine aren't completely packed yet.
[Guest]: I'll get another hour or two to pack them.
[Guest]: And so, we had a...
[Guest]: So, one day, a whole bunch of excise people have caught.
[Guest]: This guy is completely paralyzed and he is, you know, the vehicles come and he can't go.
[Guest]: So, anyway, I land up there and I find this guy a complete wreck,
[Guest]: because the excise person has alleged that the material that he is sending for washing machines
[Guest]: is actually material he is sending for the air conditioner,
[Guest]: but it has been misclassified in order to save excise duty.
[Guest]: And there is no proof that this gentleman can give that will satisfy that person.
[Guest]: After a really long time and the exchange of a little bit of consideration,
[Guest]: of consideration, he was finally let go.
[Guest]: But that person, you know, he is an elderly gentleman.
[Guest]: He was so shaken up by this.
[Guest]: Within a few months, he sold off his entire business and disappeared.
[Guest]: I have never met him again.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's really sad.
[Amit Varma]: And you say, you know, the exchange of a little consideration.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, I guess, all these laws...
[Amit Varma]: See, typically, how we think of all these laws,
[Amit Varma]: which give too much discretionary power to inspectors, Inspector Raj and all,
[Amit Varma]: is that it's all rent-seeking.
[Amit Varma]: Was that the case with you?
[Amit Varma]: Were you having to pay, like, bribes?
[Guest]: Actually, not much, right?
[Guest]: So, they were...
[Guest]: So, you had...
[Guest]: So, there would be a visit from a PWD inspector.
[Guest]: Now, actually, no one knew what the PWD inspector came and inspected.
[Guest]: So, he just came, he gave you a...
[Guest]: First, he would send a little sort of notice saying that he's coming on such and such date.
[Guest]: Then you come on that date, you sit in your office, you have your tea.
[Guest]: There would be a small...
[Guest]: Back in the day, I think it was a thousand rupees or something.
[Guest]: You paid him a thousand rupees, he would give you his report,
[Guest]: and that was the end of the thing.
[Guest]: I later found out that this was an electric safety report.
[Guest]: So, this was certifying that my factory is electrically safe.
[Guest]: And that person who was certified in has no accountability at all.
[Guest]: So, you know, if it's not safe and God forbid, somebody dies,
[Guest]: he's not responsible.
[Guest]: So, why is he even certifying anything if he's not responsible?
[Guest]: If somebody is certifying something,
[Guest]: you know, that person should stand by or you should record his observation,
[Guest]: or say what exactly he's done.
[Guest]: So, those days, there were a lot of those kind of visits.
[Guest]: And, you know, people who had boilers, had people from boiler department,
[Guest]: people who had...
[Guest]: They had this, they had...
[Guest]: There was someone in our area who had a small furnace.
[Guest]: There was some inspection thing for furnaces.
[Guest]: The unifying characteristics of all these were that there was no responsibility.
[Guest]: There were labor inspectors who would come.
[Guest]: There was one labor inspector whose job was to ensure that there was no child labor.
[Guest]: And he would just land up and certify that there was no child labor.
[Guest]: I mean, how would you know there's no child labor?
[Guest]: You have to, you know, you have to do some kind of due diligence.
[Guest]: There was no such.
[Guest]: And there were myriad authorities who would keep coming back in the day.
[Guest]: They would keep coming back in the day, take their little bit and go away.
[Guest]: All that seems to have vanished now.
[Guest]: But to be fair, back in the day, none of them was adversarial.
[Guest]: They were all interested in their little...
[Guest]: And it was usually modest, a few hundred rupees to a few thousand rupees.
[Guest]: They would take their money and do Ram Ram and go away.
[Guest]: And you never see from them again.
[Guest]: There were reports.
[Guest]: So sometimes what would happen is they would be haggling.
[Guest]: And then the guy, the officer, I mean, there's no competition there.
[Guest]: You can't go to another officer.
[Guest]: So if he decided to make an example of you for haggling,
[Guest]: then you would hear of one or two people on whom cases were filed.
[Guest]: And they had to go and meet superiors and do whatever.
[Guest]: Now, it has more or less vanished.
[Guest]: So we don't have such visits.
[Guest]: We don't have, we have, I think, pollution control is one,
[Guest]: but pollution control these days is pretty serious.
[Guest]: Like they'll actually, you know, you can't just say that we have all day,
[Guest]: they'll see every fuming chimney and every smokestack, everything is inspected.
[Guest]: There are norms, there are pollution norms, everything.
[Guest]: It is, they do a far more serious job now than they used to.
[Guest]: I haven't had labor inspectors in a really long time,
[Guest]: but we do have to maintain records.
[Guest]: They are being filed regularly.
[Guest]: All those things are there.
[Guest]: So, and as I was saying, GST is pretty clear.
[Guest]: It's a pretty brutal regime.
[Guest]: I mean, GST, if you don't pay GST, you are screwed.
[Guest]: But if you do and, you know, your records are all okay,
[Guest]: really no one hassles you at all.
[Guest]: You never have GST officers knocking on your door.
[Guest]: So what really stops industry from growing, in my opinion?
[Guest]: Two things, just two things.
[Guest]: One is access to land and the second is access to capital.
[Guest]: They really don't have either.
[Guest]: So today, if you want to get any kind of land, especially industrial land,
[Guest]: this is not so much the case in residential, I believe.
[Guest]: It's, you know, it's possible to go and buy a flat without paying a penny in cash.
[Guest]: It's everything is checked.
[Guest]: But in industrial circles, that's still not the case.
[Guest]: I am told that a good 50% of the considerations are cash in many places.
[Guest]: What happens is for most of us, for people like us, we have,
[Guest]: I mean, if I had to buy something, I would take a bank loan to the extent of 80 or 90%.
[Guest]: And if I had to pay a big chunk of it in cash, there's no way I can get bank finance.
[Guest]: So I don't end up buying premises.
[Guest]: Access to land is one.
[Guest]: And the second is access to capital.
[Guest]: Even today, if you want business finance, it's very, very expensive.
[Guest]: Unless you have collateral security to give, and then it's dramatically cheap.
[Guest]: So if, you know, if you had a house and you wanted a one crore rupee loan,
[Guest]: you'd pay an interest of 7%.
[Guest]: If you didn't have collateral security of your house to give, you'd pay, I don't know, 15, 17%.
[Guest]: And that difference can be killing for many businesses.
[Guest]: And so if the present government wants manufacturing to grow, they seem to want that.
[Guest]: They seem to want MSMEs to grow because a lot of, you know, it just picks up a lot of employment.
[Guest]: And MSMEs are also very inventive and enterprising when it comes to getting business.
[Guest]: So if you want to export stuff, you know, you leave an entrepreneur on his own.
[Guest]: He'll go, he'll find out, you know, something's required in Lithuania,
[Guest]: and he knows that some input for that comes from Taiwan.
[Guest]: He'll get the input from Taiwan, the other input from Bolivia,
[Guest]: and then send it to Lithuania.
[Guest]: All those things happen.
[Guest]: It's never going to happen in, you know, in large corporations.
[Guest]: Because for most large corporations, all these small petty businesses are not worth the thing,
[Guest]: and definitely not going to work in a government environment,
[Guest]: although there's no way it's going to happen.
[Guest]: But yeah, I don't see these two problems getting solved anytime soon.
[Guest]: So we're going to be second best after China for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: That's what it looks like.
[Amit Varma]: Second best or third best or whatever best.
[Amit Varma]: I've actually heard contrary stories about GST from businessmen as well,
[Amit Varma]: about how it's made things so much worse for them.
[Amit Varma]: And just speaking for myself, I have to like, file every month.
[Guest]: And it's just irritating.
[Guest]: But it's not ambiguous.
[Guest]: The thing about why, I'll tell you.
[Guest]: So one of my companies, we had, so someone, it's a very small company,
[Guest]: we keep, we file, we do the GST every month, everything is fine.
[Guest]: One month, this is during the COVID, you know, it was just emerging out of COVID.
[Guest]: Our, the person looked after the GST.
[Guest]: I think he got, either he got COVID or someone close to him got COVID.
[Guest]: He was basically unable for that entire month.
[Guest]: He was basically running pillar to post.
[Guest]: He survived, everything turned out well.
[Guest]: But you know, it was an anxious time.
[Guest]: And for some reason, our GST return did not get filed.
[Guest]: The next thing I know is, I get a letter saying that we're going to attach your bank account.
[Guest]: This is just like 8-10 days.
[Guest]: Luckily, he came back, we filed it, it's all.
[Guest]: But it's that menacing.
[Guest]: If your bank account gets attached, it's practically curtains for your business.
[Guest]: Curtains for your business, you cannot work, your bank account is frozen,
[Guest]: you can't pay anyone, you can't receive any money, nothing, nothing, nothing.
[Guest]: And what happens then to, you know, we employ 25-30 people,
[Guest]: maybe 100-150 people dependent on our company.
[Guest]: Just all of a sudden, because you're not able to pay your GST in time,
[Guest]: if your bank account gets attached, it's curtains for your business.
[Guest]: What are these people going to do?
[Guest]: So, you know, government is always thinking about their revenue and their listing.
[Guest]: Very little empathy for what problems industry might be facing.
[Guest]: So I've heard anecdotal stories about a lot of small companies folding up because of this.
[Guest]: You know, they can't take the harassment, they can't take the tension any longer.
[Guest]: So, not the harassment, just the tension.
[Guest]: Just like, you know, you have to pay X and you have no money.
[Guest]: And that's because one of your customers hasn't paid you money.
[Guest]: So, you know, and you have no other resources.
[Guest]: So then you just fold up after some time, you just pack up the business because
[Guest]: you don't want to face the prospect of going to prison or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, I mean, there's a lot of messy elements.
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example, someone was telling me about the business where they supply
[Amit Varma]: merchandise and those kind of items to various stores.
[Amit Varma]: And in the earlier regime, you don't have to pay any taxes on those things until they are sold.
[Amit Varma]: But in this regime, once you send it to a store, you have to pay your GST on it.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're a small business, if you don't have working capital,
[Amit Varma]: you're blown out of the water right away.
[Amit Varma]: And I know of cases where this has kind of happened.
[Amit Varma]: And just speaking of regulations, you know, you were talking about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: all the different regulations and the inspectors who would come.
[Amit Varma]: And I did an episode long ago when episodes were much shorter,
[Amit Varma]: when they were little miniatures of half an hour with our mutual friend,
[Amit Varma]: Madhu Menon on restaurant regulations.
[Amit Varma]: And Madhu pointed out, he used to run a fantastic
[Amit Varma]: South East Asian restaurant called Shiok in Bangalore.
[Amit Varma]: Sadly, he shut down because just running a business is very hard.
[Amit Varma]: It's not just about creating great food and great ambience, both of which he did.
[Amit Varma]: But he told me the story about how there were two separate inspectors
[Amit Varma]: who would keep inspecting the restaurant.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them was the fire safety guy.
[Amit Varma]: And for the fire safety regulation was you have to have multiple entrances
[Amit Varma]: to your restaurant for safety reasons.
[Amit Varma]: So it's obvious and it's fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: And then there was, I think, the excise regulation
[Amit Varma]: where they wanted to control the entry of liquor.
[Amit Varma]: So that regulation was there can only be one entrance to any restaurant
[Amit Varma]: because they want to, you know, check the chip,
[Amit Varma]: make it easy for them to check liquor going in and out.
[Amit Varma]: And you obviously can't comply with both.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you can't be like Schrodinger's restaurant,
[Amit Varma]: that if this dude shows up, he sees two entrances.
[Amit Varma]: If the other dude shows up, he sees one entrance.
[Amit Varma]: You are going to break one of those laws.
[Amit Varma]: Chances are you're going to have to bribe both of those guys.
[Amit Varma]: And then the point is like other people who run businesses in the current day
[Amit Varma]: have told me that like one guy who shut a similar enterprise a few years back
[Amit Varma]: said, boss, I was bribing 30 people a month.
[Amit Varma]: I just couldn't do it.
[Amit Varma]: And even this ease of business rankings that we've gone up in a little bit,
[Amit Varma]: a couple of years back, we went back and the government was boasting about it.
[Amit Varma]: The point is that they game the metrics in terms of ease of doing business.
[Amit Varma]: It didn't actually become better.
[Amit Varma]: And one way of thinking about this is through an anecdote,
[Amit Varma]: which is not about business.
[Amit Varma]: But like I keep saying that there's really no rule of law in this country effectively,
[Amit Varma]: unless you're very rich.
[Amit Varma]: But there's no rule of law in this country effectively.
[Amit Varma]: And the state is a parasite.
[Amit Varma]: And an illustration of that comes from my poker playing years.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't know if I told you the story,
[Amit Varma]: but did I tell you the story about the raid?
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, so I'll repeat it for my listeners.
[Amit Varma]: So basically, there used to be these underground cash games all over the place.
[Amit Varma]: So somebody I know used to organize an underground cash game.
[Amit Varma]: And this happened to be there was a new building that had just been built.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it's near the urban Tarka at Lokhandwala,
[Amit Varma]: not the one at seven bungalows.
[Amit Varma]: Besides that, there was a new building and most of the flats were not occupied.
[Amit Varma]: So my friend rented out one of these flats and a game used to happen there.
[Amit Varma]: And what typically happens is when you conduct an underground game
[Amit Varma]: is that people kind of play the game.
[Amit Varma]: And poker, of course, it's a game of scale.
[Amit Varma]: You're playing against the other person.
[Amit Varma]: However, the house, the people organizing the game
[Amit Varma]: and getting the players together,
[Amit Varma]: they take a cut of every pot, which is called the rake.
[Amit Varma]: So you take a small cut of every pot,
[Amit Varma]: and that eventually amounts to a lot of money.
[Amit Varma]: So this friend of mine lives in Bombay, but was in Goa at the time.
[Amit Varma]: And he had a very nice guy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll give him a fake name for now.
[Amit Varma]: I'll say Salim, but basically a Muslim guy,
[Amit Varma]: which is, you know, key to the story, as you'll realize.
[Amit Varma]: So the person we shall call Salim used to run this game for him.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the neighbors in this partly occupied building
[Amit Varma]: realized one day that there are all these young men
[Amit Varma]: who are coming every day into this otherwise unoccupied flat.
[Amit Varma]: And they have backpacks and they all look like Kasab.
[Amit Varma]: And this was circa 2011-2012.
[Amit Varma]: Right, and they all look like Kasab.
[Amit Varma]: So they compared to the anti-terrorism cell, the ATS, as we call it.
[Amit Varma]: So the ATS decided to do a raid.
[Amit Varma]: So the ATS lands up when a game is on and they ring the bell.
[Amit Varma]: And our friend Salim, which is a name we've given him,
[Amit Varma]: but remember, he's a Muslim.
[Amit Varma]: So our friend Salim opens the door and they ask him,
[Amit Varma]: What's going on here?
[Amit Varma]: The anti-terrorism squad asks him.
[Amit Varma]: And Salim has been raided before poker games.
[Amit Varma]: It happens once in a while, you pay a hafta, you get away.
[Amit Varma]: So Salim smiles very sweetly.
[Amit Varma]: And he says, Sir, you know, first they ask him his name.
[Amit Varma]: He says, Sir Salim.
[Amit Varma]: Then they say, What's going on here?
[Amit Varma]: And Salim says, You know what's going on.
[Amit Varma]: Sir, what you're thinking is what's going on.
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, so the ATS squad comes in and then they realize what's really going on.
[Amit Varma]: And they make Salim.
[Amit Varma]: I'm finding the name amusing because it's a made up name.
[Amit Varma]: But they make Salim call up this friend of mine
[Amit Varma]: who is at that moment in time in Goa.
[Amit Varma]: And who is a seasoned veteran.
[Amit Varma]: So he tells these cops that don't worry, Sir, I'll come and settle this, that.
[Amit Varma]: You let the boys play.
[Amit Varma]: And on that particular day, and I had been to that game two or three times.
[Amit Varma]: But on that particular day, it was all young teenagers who were playing.
[Amit Varma]: It was a low stakes game.
[Amit Varma]: So they were all terrified that the cops are here.
[Amit Varma]: And no fucking what's going to happen and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And the cop calmly pats one of them on the head and says,
[Amit Varma]: It's okay, play, play.
[Amit Varma]: And then they go away.
[Amit Varma]: So the next day, my friend comes back from Goa and he meets these guys.
[Amit Varma]: And this guy says, OK, so this is a deal you're playing every day.
[Amit Varma]: This is how it goes.
[Amit Varma]: So give us a week of X amount every month.
[Amit Varma]: Now, my friend was smart enough to not fall for this.
[Amit Varma]: He said, look, Sir, I'll give you a week today.
[Amit Varma]: But tomorrow your second department will come and ask.
[Amit Varma]: Day after tomorrow, your third department will come and ask.
[Amit Varma]: So it's better that you tell me a consolidated amount.
[Amit Varma]: After that, I don't want any tension.
[Amit Varma]: So the cop says, yeah, this is a good point.
[Amit Varma]: So, OK, come back tomorrow afternoon.
[Amit Varma]: So he goes the next afternoon to this police station or wherever he goes,
[Amit Varma]: wherever the meeting is.
[Amit Varma]: And you have three guys from three different departments across the table with him.
[Amit Varma]: And they negotiate a bit and they arrive at a consolidated amount,
[Amit Varma]: which he pays, which will be divided, however.
[Amit Varma]: And then he takes them to Marriott for lunch.
[Amit Varma]: And my point of this long story is that this is basically the game.
[Amit Varma]: That, you know, any actual policing that you see is kind of accidental.
[Amit Varma]: We are very lucky to have it.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, this is a parasitic state at work.
[Amit Varma]: This is how everything works.
[Amit Varma]: And it is so completely explicit when it comes to the case of businesses.
[Amit Varma]: Like you pointed out that someone is coming there to see that there are no child laborers.
[Amit Varma]: It is a worthwhile inspection to do.
[Amit Varma]: Even that guy is sitting in your office, having a child, taking a bribe, going away.
[Amit Varma]: No one actually gives a shit about the law, right?
[Guest]: But this is egregiously, you know, present in all these fire cases that you keep seeing, right?
[Guest]: So some building or the other goes up in flames.
[Guest]: And almost never is there an audit into what inspection was done
[Guest]: and why the person who has done the inspection should not be put under the scanner.
[Guest]: So the reason for this is accountability, okay, is like a cancer for them.
[Guest]: Because if you allow the principle that a building fire inspector is accountable for his report,
[Guest]: there is nothing to stop a cabinet secretary from being accountable for whatever he is accountable for.
[Guest]: So no one in the establishment wants accountability ever to percolate into theirs.
[Guest]: It's not that they don't know about.
[Guest]: You, for example, are liable to pay, let us say, GST.
[Guest]: And you have appointed a GST consultant to pay it for you.
[Guest]: And for some reason or the other, maybe GST consultant died.
[Guest]: Maybe he had a domestic problem, whatever, he didn't pay your GST.
[Guest]: And you've just been sort of transferring the money, you know, you calculate, you send the money to him.
[Guest]: He didn't file the thing.
[Guest]: Who faces the music? You do.
[Guest]: You cannot pass it on to.
[Guest]: So it's not that the government doesn't understand the meaning of accountability.
[Guest]: They understand it very well.
[Guest]: They make sure it doesn't apply to them.
[Guest]: The day this happens, I'm pretty sure we'll have a huge transformed state.
[Guest]: But it is like, you know, because if you have to introduce accountability,
[Guest]: it has to be the government that does it.
[Guest]: It is like asking an alcoholic to blow up a distillery.
[Guest]: It's very, very, very, very unlikely not going to happen.
[Guest]: So it becomes wishful thinking.
[Guest]: Then what happens is, like so many successful businessmen you see now,
[Guest]: the person who is able to manage the environment best wins.
[Guest]: So in the case of Madhu, we know very well what kind of a person he is.
[Guest]: He's a sensitive person.
[Guest]: He has no two standards.
[Guest]: He lives by a code and he expects everyone to live by the same code.
[Guest]: There is no duplicity within him.
[Guest]: He's not able to accommodate the duplicity which is necessary for doing business.
[Amit Varma]: No, in his case, I think he was practical enough to make all the payments when required.
[Amit Varma]: You do what it takes.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, his business, the restaurant ran for six to seven years.
[Amit Varma]: If you, you know, Google for sure, it is still regarded as a cult place.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, running a business in India is too hard.
[Guest]: And I don't think anyone who runs it is not.
[Guest]: So that's the argument I'm saying.
[Guest]: So if Madhu, you know, he's really good at cooking.
[Guest]: And I've, I've not eaten at his restaurant, but I've eaten what Madhu has cooked.
[Guest]: And I have, you know, I have, I know so many of our friends who have eaten at Shauk.
[Guest]: It was an outstandingly good restaurant.
[Guest]: And it should have been like, you know, there is this restaurant called Olive and Olive is a chain now.
[Guest]: There are many, many olives and the guy who started it must be doing very, very well.
[Guest]: Madhu could have been that person.
[Guest]: Had he outsourced his liaison work to someone savvy, because if he had to pay an X percentage of his,
[Guest]: he would have factored in that as a cost, adjusted his pricing accordingly, adjusted
[Guest]: his business model accordingly and gone on with it.
[Guest]: So the, you know, the, the, the government, you know, the onerous burden of missing is,
[Guest]: I don't think it's, that is the reason why business doesn't flourish in India.
[Guest]: I think it's because delivery of government services is not what, though that is improving
[Guest]: now, if you look at infrastructure, I don't know what cost it comes at.
[Guest]: But infrastructure is a lot, lot better than what it was when we were growing up.
[Guest]: It's also a function, I think, of the nation's prosperity.
[Guest]: We, I mean, we do get, all countries become more prosperous.
[Guest]: We do earn more money.
[Guest]: There is, so, but a lot of services that the government has, is supposed to deliver,
[Guest]: it doesn't get delivered because there is no incentive for anyone to do so.
[Guest]: There is no accountability.
[Amit Varma]: Like what kind of services?
[Guest]: Like the rule of law or contract resolution?
[Guest]: Law is the most, you know, like, you know, we are a nation which is pro-poor.
[Guest]: Like always, the entire rhetoric has always been Garibon Ka Desh and everything.
[Guest]: Politician after politician has wept tears for the plight of poor people.
[Guest]: And yet you just have to go hang out outside a police station, see what happens when a poor guy
[Guest]: goes.
[Guest]: The first thing he gets is a slap, for anything, whatever, if you come, you should, you know,
[Guest]: this is how they do.
[Guest]: They, they, they're not sympathetically treated.
[Guest]: There is not, I have, so once Sheila and I, we lost, we had some shares and so one of the
[Guest]: certificates was missing.
[Guest]: So we asked for a duplicate service back in the day and we asked for a duplicate certificate
[Guest]: and they said that the requirement for that is that you have to have an FIR.
[Guest]: So you have to go, so I went to Malad Police Station and I was expecting to, you know,
[Guest]: be asked for a bribe or anything like that.
[Guest]: To my great surprise, not only was I not asked for a bribe, the inspector actually, you know,
[Guest]: was very courteous, asked, there was some chai coming and I speak Marathi well, so we
[Guest]: spoke in Marathi for some time and then Sheila doesn't speak Marathi, so there was some
[Guest]: good-hearted, you know, sort of, you know, why don't you, you've been in Mumbai, why don't you
[Guest]: speak, all that kind of happening.
[Guest]: And just then, a boy, man is brought in for something and his mother is, you know, comes
[Guest]: running after him, crying to leave him and there is, it's something, some neighbours, he hit
[Guest]: someone, she hit some, there was some such thing.
[Guest]: What they did was, they, so he tells his assistant to take him Mandir mein leke jao.
[Guest]: So Sheila is like, you know, so why are they taking him to a temple?
[Guest]: And then he says, Mandir mein leke jao, main aata hoon, phir pooja karenge.
[Guest]: So, and Sheila, being Sheila, was wondering why, then I told her and by that time, the
[Guest]: gentleman had gone away.
[Guest]: So I told her what was happening and then you could hear muted cries and, you know,
[Guest]: obviously he was being slapped or whatever, what was being happening inside.
[Guest]: And around the same time, our work gets done.
[Guest]: So the person was assigned to writing out, he's written out and there's quite a procedure to
[Guest]: writing out and there's several registers to be filled out, he's filled out all the
[Guest]: registers, he's written it out, he's given me a copy of everything and so I thank my
[Guest]: inspector and I go away.
[Guest]: So it's a different law for privileged people like us and different one for poor people
[Guest]: and that is something which does need to be addressed in, you know, it'd be nice if it
[Amit Varma]: happens soon.
[Amit Varma]: You know, when you mentioned accountability, you correctly said that accountability is
[Amit Varma]: for the people, it's not for the government and it should really be the other way around.
[Amit Varma]: The government should be accountable to us.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, we don't have to be accountable to them.
[Amit Varma]: And yet it's almost as if, you know, when you deal with the police, the vibe you get
[Amit Varma]: is guilty until proven innocent.
[Amit Varma]: And for us privileged people, it might be slightly different unless you're a film star's
[Amit Varma]: son.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise for, you know, for I think 95% of Indians, essentially the rule of law is
[Amit Varma]: completely absent.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we are really in the top 1% or half percent or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: I think the extent of poverty in this country is underestimated.
[Amit Varma]: The way you kind of described how you fell into this business is similar to how you fell
[Amit Varma]: into doing an MBA.
[Amit Varma]: That, oh, my friend was filling a form, so I also filled a form and I got in.
[Amit Varma]: And then, oh, I didn't really enjoy the MBA job and a friend said, let's start a business.
[Amit Varma]: So I started a business.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, was it just kind of an accident, a decision you took at a point and before
[Amit Varma]: you know it, 30 years have passed or whatever, and you're still doing the same thing?
[Amit Varma]: Or was there some sort of ambition, some kind of directionality?
[Amit Varma]: You know, were there other ambitions during this while?
[Amit Varma]: For example, there is a famous Facebook group called We Want Narendra Shenoy to write a
[Amit Varma]: book, which many of your friends have been telling you for a long time for your enormous
[Amit Varma]: storytelling skills.
[Amit Varma]: So were there other things playing out at this moment within you?
[Guest]: I'm almost embarrassed to say that I didn't have any, I've never had any plan whatsoever
[Guest]: ever in my life.
[Guest]: So I've, I'm, I'm one of those easily persuaded people.
[Guest]: So that's, that's my problem with politicians as well.
[Guest]: So I listened to a persuasive politician, and I'm completely convinced till I listened
[Guest]: to the other side, and then I'm completely convinced about that as well.
[Guest]: And oftentimes those two opinions, it's impossible to have them in one thing.
[Guest]: So similarly, even when it comes to businesses, I'm very easily persuaded.
[Guest]: And I, you know, I'm, I'm just enthusiastic about everything.
[Guest]: What, what happens in a, because that's the nature of all businesses, is that your environment
[Guest]: keeps changing the demand.
[Guest]: So for example, you could have a typewriter factory in 1992, and you would sell 1 million
[Guest]: typewriters a year.
[Guest]: And by 2000, you wouldn't sell a single one.
[Guest]: So things keep changing.
[Guest]: One of, you know, my main business is automotive components, and I supply to automobiles.
[Guest]: And tomorrow, if the expected transformation to electric vehicles happens much quicker
[Guest]: than we think it will, I might be out of work in a couple of years time.
[Guest]: I have, you know, there's no one wants my product anymore, because it is basically a
[Guest]: sound suppressing thing, which is far more required in, you know, engine driven cars,
[Guest]: petrol or diesel driven cars than in electric vehicles.
[Guest]: So, I, yeah, I was planning for the, like, you know, having a direction is not, not,
[Guest]: not what I'm terribly good at.
[Guest]: I'm just, I've just been stumbling along.
[Guest]: That's, that's what I've been doing for the last 30 years or so.
[Guest]: But yeah, actually come to think of it, I have no clue why it is so.
[Guest]: No one told me not to plan.
[Guest]: It's just that I'm not good at it.
[Guest]: I've never done anything like that.
[Amit Varma]: So, on that note, I mean, I don't plan my commercial breaks either.
[Amit Varma]: They just come when they come.
[Amit Varma]: And I think this is a good time for a commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: So, let's give in to the moment and take a quick commercial break and come back on the
[Amit Varma]: other side.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Since April last year, I've enjoyed teaching 17 cohorts of my online course, The Art of
[Amit Varma]: Clear Writing.
[Amit Varma]: An online community has now sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four Saturdays, I share all I
[Amit Varma]: know about the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction, and that lovely and lively community at the
[Amit Varma]: end of it.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs Rs. 10,000 plus GST, or about $150, and registration is now open for my
[Amit Varma]: Winter 2021 cohort.
[Amit Varma]: This will run through the last two weeks of November, and the first two weeks of December.
[Amit Varma]: Classes begin on November 20th.
[Amit Varma]: So, if you're interested, head on over to register at indiauncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: That's indiauncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer doesn't require God-given talent, just the willingness to work hard
[Amit Varma]: and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I want to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Narendra Shenoy, who, before the break, confessed that he was never a kid
[Amit Varma]: with ambitions and never had a plan for his life.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, it's refreshing to hear that.
[Amit Varma]: I think, you know, we are often sold a couple of these new-age self-help-y things, which
[Amit Varma]: is, you got to follow your passion and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that that's sort of wrong at multiple levels.
[Amit Varma]: One is, it doesn't consider expected value, which we were just discussing before this.
[Amit Varma]: That is quite OK if, say, your kid wants to be something unconventional.
[Amit Varma]: And let's say your kid wants to be a singer.
[Amit Varma]: And he says, look, Arijit Singh has done so well, which is great.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, Arijit Singh is an outlier.
[Amit Varma]: He's the one guy who made it in a business where typically a handful of people really
[Amit Varma]: make a lot of money and the rest of them are perennial strugglers.
[Amit Varma]: So you need to keep that in mind.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas if you do engineering MBA, all the mediocre engineers and MBAs out there are
[Amit Varma]: going to make a really healthy living and provide well for their families.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I keep saying the cafes of Versova are filled with the strugglers who follow
[Unknown]: their dream for 25 years and look where it got them.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, I'm glad.
[Amit Varma]: I think people need to realize that not everybody necessarily has to have a dream per se, you
[Amit Varma]: know.
[Amit Varma]: But even though you didn't have a dream, you obviously had things that you like doing,
[Amit Varma]: things that you cared about and were passionate about.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit more about them.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I know food is one of them, obviously, we've kind of connected on that level a heck
[Amit Varma]: of a lot.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit more about food, especially like, was it from a childhood thing as your
[Amit Varma]: grandfather, you know, ran a restaurant and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And tell me a bit more about, you know, how you started thinking about food as a USMB?
[Guest]: Yeah, so growing up, we were not a restaurant going family.
[Guest]: We used to eat at home.
[Guest]: We used to eat at home and I used to love the food that, you know, so I belong to a
[Guest]: community called Gaut Saraswat Brahman.
[Guest]: And we have, you know, it's basically idli and dosa.
[Guest]: So here's an interesting, so I used to, when I was a kid, I used to hate the fact that
[Guest]: my mom used to make idlis and dosas every day.
[Guest]: So, you know, it was either idli or dosa.
[Guest]: So my sisters were my, I mean, we had gone to this house to live and they had a couple
[Guest]: of friends and they had come over, my sisters are doing their homework.
[Guest]: And these girls come over and they want to, you know, play.
[Guest]: I said, they're busy, they're doing their homework.
[Guest]: And I was older, so I asked them, you know, can I get you something?
[Guest]: Can I get you a glass of water, soft drink or something?
[Guest]: They said, no, no, we've eaten, we've come, little girls.
[Guest]: And the younger of them volunteers that, you know, we had bread and jam for breakfast.
[Guest]: So I said, that sounds nice.
[Guest]: And then she volunteered further information, said, we had, we have bread and jam for breakfast
[Guest]: every day.
[Guest]: So I said, indeed.
[Guest]: So she said, yeah, except Sundays.
[Guest]: I said, what do you have on Sunday?
[Guest]: She said, we had bread, butter and jam.
[Guest]: That's when I realized, the first time I realized that I was far more privileged in the terms
[Guest]: of having good home cooking as compared to many other people.
[Guest]: My mother was a good cook, she was, she used to make, she doesn't eat non-veg, but she
[Guest]: used to make, you know, chicken and things like that for us.
[Guest]: So my father was a very, you know, he loved people.
[Guest]: He had to have friends and we had a large house.
[Guest]: So every Saturday, all his colleagues, almost everyone was a doctor.
[Guest]: So they would all like wind up with their practices at 10 or 11 at night and come home
[Guest]: for a drink.
[Guest]: And there would be a lot of singing, dancing, boisterous partying till two or three in the
[Guest]: morning.
[Guest]: And my mother would cook for all of them without complaining.
[Guest]: So that it was, you know, regardless and oftentimes these people would come without warning.
[Guest]: So my father wouldn't even tell her and then cooking would begin at 11 at night.
[Guest]: And I also remember this, almost always, she would be the only person in the kitchen doing
[Guest]: everything, chopping vegetables quickly and putting things, washing rice, making food.
[Guest]: So when I got married, Sheila was my wife, was a far more restaurant person.
[Guest]: So she liked to go out and I like, I had never, you know, restaurant going was never a part
[Guest]: of my upbringing.
[Guest]: Indeed, when I used to go out, my comfort food was dal fry and roti.
[Guest]: So wherever I went, I just ordered dal fry and roti and I didn't like to go to Chinese
[Guest]: restaurants because they didn't have dal fry and roti.
[Guest]: So then, first of all, when Sheila found out about this, she was aghast and then slowly
[Guest]: she changed my view towards food and over the last 30 years, I have become practically
[Guest]: human and I like many cuisines and Southeast Asian cuisine being my favorite.
[Guest]: But I wasn't much of a foodie for a long period of time.
[Guest]: Then somewhere in 2007 or 2008, one of those times, we had a visitor.
[Guest]: So he was an uncle's brother, uncle by marriage's brother or something like that.
[Guest]: Not very liked among the women folk because he was outspoken and many things, but one
[Guest]: thing he was, was a good cook.
[Guest]: And when he came home, he said, I'm cooking.
[Guest]: And he stayed with us for a few days and he, you know, sort of enlisted my support.
[Guest]: So I had no idea, I didn't, I never chopped vegetables, I didn't think.
[Guest]: So we went out, he bought me one big chef's knife, which I still have, like a big knife,
[Guest]: the likes of which our kitchen has never seen, though that kind of a knife.
[Guest]: And then he taught me how to chop vegetables and cut onions and things like that.
[Guest]: So we, I would chop vegetables and he would make, he would make things.
[Guest]: So he made, I remember he made a poached ravas, I think.
[Guest]: And that was the first time I'd seen anything like that made.
[Guest]: It was pretty tasty because, you know, eating fish without any masala is revolting to most
[Guest]: people from my community.
[Guest]: And this guy actually made it tasty, he squeezed some lemon on that, he put some leaves and
[Guest]: tomatoes and stuff like that, it was actually tasty.
[Guest]: And after he left, I started, you know, YouTube wasn't really a big thing back then.
[Guest]: So I had to figure out, so I kept buying all these recipe books and reverse engineering.
[Guest]: About five times out of 10, it was inedible, completely inedible, so you had to throw it
[Guest]: out.
[Guest]: But on occasion, it turned out very nice.
[Guest]: And then I started getting interested more and more in different kinds of cuisine.
[Guest]: One thing about when you actually cook, you then start, so that's why I love Krish Ashok's
[Guest]: book Masala Lab, because he reduces everything to general principles.
[Guest]: And you can sort of play around with that.
[Guest]: He never says anywhere in the book that he is right.
[Guest]: He just explains what he thinks is happening.
[Guest]: A lot of it is even now is not settled science, so you'll have more views than one.
[Guest]: But you get a general idea.
[Guest]: So what the tadka is, or you know, what you're doing when you're making gravy, or how you
[Guest]: would cook different meats, and some of that.
[Guest]: So Ashok used to write this kind of stuff on Twitter even before.
[Guest]: And even before he started writing, I used to read other people and figure some of that.
[Guest]: And then when you make it yourself, and it's not always pleasant, sometimes it's rubbish,
[Guest]: but you learn at every stage, you become more sensitive to what might be going on.
[Guest]: And you eat yummy stuff elsewhere.
[Guest]: And then I started appreciating outside food a lot more.
[Guest]: And I would seek out, you know, unusual eateries, unusual kind of foods.
[Guest]: And oftentimes, I would be pleasantly surprised.
[Guest]: There was one I was telling you earlier about, we had gone to Hampi, and we were staying
[Guest]: in this place called Hospet, and we were staying in a resort, and we had the usual resort fare.
[Guest]: It was extremely bland and not appetizing at all.
[Guest]: So my brother-in-law and I, we decided to seek out.
[Guest]: So we had a driver, and we asked the driver where he ate.
[Guest]: And he pointed us out to a small hole in the wall, which turned out to be serving a cuisine
[Guest]: called Saoji.
[Guest]: And this is indescribably hot.
[Guest]: It's like, it has like industrial quantities of chili in that, yet it is very flavorful.
[Guest]: So you put that in your mouth, and your mouth is on fire, and yet you want to have more
[Guest]: of that.
[Guest]: That was a novel experience.
[Guest]: I had never eaten anything as spicy as that.
[Guest]: That was fun.
[Guest]: There is one place near Virar, north of Bombay, where there is one eatery which serves poha
[Guest]: and chicken.
[Guest]: It's very tasty.
[Guest]: I mean, I have never eaten anything like that anywhere else, but it's a thing.
[Guest]: And it has its own little history, how it started, and somebody, here's what I think
[Guest]: is, someone had a drink or two too much and went off to make chicken pulao, and instead
[Guest]: of putting rice, he put poha, and it turned out to be nice.
[Guest]: That's what I believe happened.
[Guest]: There's some other story that he told me.
[Guest]: And you start appreciating different kinds of, so some food you don't like, there is
[Guest]: too much spice in it, or there's too much happening in it.
[Guest]: But some food, it just appears, it's very complex.
[Guest]: Just like life, food is very complex, and some kind of food just appeals to you, some
[Guest]: kind doesn't, and different food appeals to different people.
[Guest]: It's fascinating.
[Guest]: So I did a lot of eating out in the last 8 or 10 years, went to different places.
[Guest]: We went on a trip to Mysore once and sampled 4 or 5 different cuisines in a small, really
[Guest]: small town, just because it happened to be the confluence of cultures.
[Guest]: Food says a lot about the culture it comes from as well, and it's very interesting, it's
[Guest]: very satisfying, it's like a good meal, it's 100 times better than a good drink, is what
[Guest]: I feel.
[Amit Varma]: And does it, like you pointed out, that of course you started noticing more nuances of
[Amit Varma]: food when you would eat out, because you started cooking and all that, but do you feel that
[Amit Varma]: it made you more mindful of the process of eating in general, like one of the things
[Amit Varma]: I often find, even when I order something which I absolutely love, like the ramen we
[Amit Varma]: had today, is that initially I'll enjoy the taste, but then my mind will just drift off.
[Amit Varma]: So I could really be having any damn thing for the rest of the time, right?
[Amit Varma]: It's just that initial moment where you're mindful and where you're enjoying it.
[Amit Varma]: And I find that, and I don't like that about myself, but it always happens with everything
[Amit Varma]: that I kind of do, because one of my sort of credos in life now is that take joy in
[Amit Varma]: the small things.
[Amit Varma]: You know, if you wait for big things to give you joy, the big things may not happen, you
[Amit Varma]: know, most dreams don't come true, the big things don't happen, there are so many small
[Amit Varma]: things around which can give you so much joy and food is definitely one of them.
[Amit Varma]: But I find that I'm not being mindful enough, and it's almost kind of contradictory.
[Amit Varma]: Do you feel that your mindfulness while eating food has kind of gone up, or do you have to
[Guest]: keep reminding yourself?
[Guest]: Yeah, so mindfulness is, so I've had my problems with, like all of us, I'm sure, practically
[Guest]: all listeners, I think it's a big function of the explosion of, you know, your social
[Guest]: media and everything, everything is crying out for your attention.
[Guest]: And it is almost humanly impossible to be immersed in one thing, I've seen this affect
[Guest]: my reading habit.
[Guest]: So back in the day, I could read a book in maybe five or six hours, I wouldn't get up,
[Guest]: I mean, I would pick up a book and like, go cover to cover, I can't remember when the
[Guest]: last time was when I did it, I just, I'm unable to do it.
[Guest]: I set a target nowadays, to finish one chapter without sort of attending a call or looking
[Guest]: at my Twitter, I would force myself to do it.
[Guest]: So one is the way technology has evolved has started robbing you of your powers of attention.
[Guest]: There's a book called Deep Work by Cal Newport, I strongly recommend everyone read it and
[Guest]: you know, if you can't read it, at least there are a few good interviews of his on YouTube
[Amit Varma]: and you can see that.
[Amit Varma]: I did an essay on that, which is almost a TLDR of the book, a 2000 word essay, so I
[Guest]: linked that from the show notes.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's brilliant.
[Guest]: That what the TLDR of that is basically, if you want to get anything done, you have to
[Guest]: switch off.
[Guest]: So that's the switch off everything else and pursue that, just that thing.
[Guest]: It works a lot if you want to read something and so one thing that is a big problem is
[Guest]: you read a summary or watch a summary of something on YouTube and you think that you've got what
[Guest]: that thing is about, mostly books, and that couldn't be further from the truth.
[Guest]: Because when you actually read a book, you find yourself arguing with the author or getting
[Guest]: a lot more nuance or it's more leisurely, you get a chance to sort of play it out in
[Guest]: your head and rightly or wrongly or whatever it may be, you get your own meaning out of
[Guest]: that book.
[Guest]: When you see a summary on YouTube or something, it's that summarizer's point of view which
[Guest]: is being presented.
[Guest]: So if you want to read a book or if you want to do any serious thinking, it's imperative
[Guest]: that you cut yourself off, because it's very difficult.
[Guest]: In my case, I have to be online, on call, my factory works around the clock, so I leave
[Guest]: my phone on all the time and if I'm sitting and reading and the phone goes off, I pick
[Guest]: it up because half the numbers I don't recognize.
[Guest]: So it could be one of my workers or it could be a neighbor, there could be an accident
[Guest]: or there could be some emergency, so I cannot pick up the phone.
[Guest]: So I'm always distracted, but even so, it is possible.
[Guest]: So you mustn't, unless something is, like in my case, the phone, unless something is
[Guest]: very demanding of your attention, don't look at Twitter, don't look at Facebook, don't
[Guest]: look at Instagram, you'll find that experience very rewarding.
[Guest]: I find that I have to force myself to do this, I'm pretty sure that most of our listeners
[Guest]: will feel the same.
[Guest]: What used to come naturally to them a few years ago is no longer natural, they have
[Amit Varma]: to force themselves to it.
[Amit Varma]: The advice that I often give people who want to start a reading habit is that initially
[Amit Varma]: it's always tough.
[Amit Varma]: Like I was a prolific reader as a kid, then I lost that habit as an adult, then I kind
[Amit Varma]: of gained it back five, six years ago.
[Amit Varma]: And the key to remember is once you resume a reading habit, initially, it can get tough,
[Amit Varma]: your mind will keep wandering all the time and you read 20 minutes and you're like done
[Amit Varma]: with it.
[Amit Varma]: But if you just stick with it for a couple of weeks, you'll find that you're getting
[Amit Varma]: into the groove of reading, so to say, you're reading faster without compromising on depth
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, you know, and when you're bored, you find yourself reaching for a book instead
[Amit Varma]: of your cell phone, which is great.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, it's kind of fashionable in some circles to give Deepak a bit of flack.
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, one argument that I've seen on Twitter is that this is only for privileged
[Amit Varma]: people and women can't make time for themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And what are we to do?
[Amit Varma]: And I find that that criticism is obviously coming from people who haven't read the book.
[Amit Varma]: Because Newport is not telling you that you have to be able to make three hour chunks
[Amit Varma]: of time and whatever, whatever, which is, of course, not possible for a lot of people.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, what Newport does is that he lays out the problem so that you understand it
[Amit Varma]: better.
[Amit Varma]: And then he provides a number of different solutions, not all of which require you to
[Amit Varma]: take out, you know, large parts of large chunks of time to work.
[Amit Varma]: So I mean, there are four broad ways in which you can kind of, you know, deal with the problem.
[Amit Varma]: But moving on to sort of another question from the mindfulness topic, and this was,
[Amit Varma]: of course, being physically mindful of things that you're eating something, you're mindful
[Amit Varma]: of the taste or you're eating something, and you stay in the moment and you stay in the
[Amit Varma]: book and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: That is one kind of mindfulness.
[Amit Varma]: But another kind of mindfulness is added that I've been thinking of recently is at a different
[Amit Varma]: level when it comes to other people, like, you know, Immanuel Kant, you know, one of
[Amit Varma]: his categorical imperatives, one of the versions of his categorical imperative was that never
[Amit Varma]: treat other people as a means to an end, treat them as an end in itself.
[Amit Varma]: And I think all of us, most of the time are treating other people as a means to an end,
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, I call my friend home, but I want his company, you know, they're instrumental
[Amit Varma]: to my being entertained or my feeling warm or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, you know, we settle into grooves in our relationships.
[Amit Varma]: And after that, we are just acting out of play, in a sense, according to the grooves.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, there is conflict and there is friction when opposing visions of a particular
[Amit Varma]: situation collide.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a difficult one.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a different kind of mindfulness where you're mindful that this is a person.
[Amit Varma]: This is not an instrument to make me feel a particular way.
[Amit Varma]: Is this something that you kind of think about and in your case, you know, it's interesting
[Amit Varma]: because one of the, I don't like adjectives, but one of the first adjectives I once used
[Amit Varma]: for you, I think, to describe you to a friend was Uxorius, if you remember, Uxorius basically
[Amit Varma]: means a man devoted to his wife or a person devoted to their spouse.
[Amit Varma]: And yet the point is that both you and your spouse would today be completely different
[Amit Varma]: people from when you first met, completely different people.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a subtle kind of negotiation happening there at some level where you get
[Amit Varma]: used to the person you are.
[Amit Varma]: And I find that early story about how you were reading out Kotler, I think, to your
[Amit Varma]: wife or Michael Porter or whoever it was, Porter to Sheila when you were trying to impress
[Amit Varma]: her in the early days.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that.
[Amit Varma]: And so what are your kind of thoughts on this?
[Amit Varma]: Is this something where you feel that you err sometimes, that you need to kind of, are
[Guest]: there lessons here?
[Guest]: So one thing, first, very interesting that you should mention about being mindful about
[Guest]: people.
[Guest]: I guess at some level we do this to some people, people whom we love, people whom we don't,
[Guest]: you know, like whom you are with for no specific reason at all.
[Guest]: Otherwise life is, you know, it's full of, it's always transactional.
[Guest]: So it's always you expect something, someone else also expects something from you.
[Guest]: And oftentimes good relations are always mutually beneficial.
[Guest]: So if both of us have to gain something from each other, that leads to a fruitful relationship.
[Guest]: What if there is nothing to gain?
[Guest]: What if neither of us have anything to gain from, you know, does that still mean that
[Guest]: we should be together?
[Guest]: And if you see, a lot of really genuine friendships and genuine relationships are based on that,
[Guest]: when you really don't have anything together, you just are together.
[Guest]: There is nothing, it's not that you're making each other happy or anything, you just be
[Guest]: together.
[Guest]: And for many of us, that would be the relationship with our spouses.
[Guest]: So when you are newly married, there is a lot of physical interest, all those things
[Guest]: are there.
[Guest]: After some time, there is nothing new to discover about your spouse.
[Guest]: And that's when your real relationship starts.
[Guest]: And so that's a concept I never thought about before, being mindful with people.
[Guest]: In my case, with Sheela, Sheela is six years younger than me, and she was almost a child
[Guest]: when I married her.
[Guest]: She was 21 years old, which is actually a few days shy of her 21st birthday.
[Guest]: And I was 26, I think, yeah, 26 or 27.
[Guest]: She comes from a very different background.
[Guest]: So in my house, we're very outspoken, and everyone from a very young age, everyone had
[Guest]: equal democratic rights.
[Guest]: So I had all the right in the world to speak out my mind, if my parents or any elder uncles
[Guest]: were around, it wasn't considered bad.
[Guest]: And in Sheela's family, it was a far more conservative upbringing.
[Guest]: Women, for example, were, you know, trained not to say anything.
[Guest]: So the only way they expressed their displeasure or unease with anything was by either remaining
[Guest]: very quiet or shedding tears.
[Guest]: And when we got married, we had our first argument, we had a fight about something.
[Guest]: I mean, I think I drove very rashly or something, I drove recklessly, and she didn't like it,
[Guest]: and I spoke sharply to her or something like that.
[Guest]: We had some such thing, and she stopped talking to me for a few days, she didn't say a word.
[Guest]: And I didn't realize, I didn't realize there was anything amiss.
[Guest]: And after a few days, she couldn't bear it any longer.
[Guest]: She couldn't bear the fact that I wasn't understanding there was something amiss.
[Guest]: So she broke down into tears.
[Guest]: And this was surprising.
[Guest]: I grew up with two sisters who are more than outspoken.
[Guest]: So there was no circumstance in which if they were unhappy, I would not know about it.
[Guest]: They would yell at me.
[Guest]: So my mom, so my dad.
[Guest]: And the first time I see a woman just sobbing quietly, then I asked her what happened.
[Guest]: And then she told me, you know, that day you said such and such, and I didn't like it.
[Guest]: And I didn't talk to you.
[Guest]: I said, you should have told me you didn't like it.
[Guest]: So for me, it was almost like a clash of cultures.
[Guest]: In this particular case, it was easy.
[Guest]: I just encouraged her to be more communicative.
[Guest]: And then she was, and she changed a lot as a person.
[Guest]: Once she grew in confidence, once she got the confidence that she could say anything
[Guest]: to me and get away with it, it was, things were good.
[Guest]: And then we, as we grew, you know, obviously, any two people live together, you keep having
[Guest]: conflict.
[Guest]: So I famously remember telling someone that every, almost every six months, we would have
[Guest]: a fight in which divorce would be discussed at least once.
[Guest]: So I could almost plot it.
[Guest]: So you know, if like it was five months and three weeks, like it would be divorce time
[Amit Varma]: again.
[Amit Varma]: So I can guarantee you that's not a unique experience.
[Guest]: But if two people live together, and if you have communication, you whatever it might
[Guest]: be, you will resolve it.
[Guest]: It does.
[Guest]: That's human nature.
[Guest]: That's, that's how we are wired as a species.
[Guest]: And so that, I think was my, you know, I'm very proud that I encouraged Sheila to be
[Guest]: more communicative.
[Guest]: And once she did that, she sort of came into her own as a person.
[Guest]: She's a very friendly person.
[Guest]: So before this, she was very hesitant to make new friends.
[Guest]: And you know, as time passes, as she grew more comfortable, she is, you know, she makes
[Guest]: friends very easily.
[Guest]: What she made me realize is that I, I was, so I had this intellectual arrogance that
[Guest]: I knew everything, because I was usually the cleverest guy in the room, right from my school
[Guest]: days, very clever, understand everything, read a lot of books, can speak English, very
[Guest]: good at, you know, sort of pulling out a quote, a clever quote from Shakespeare or Woodhouse
[Guest]: or something like that, win the day, win the argument and things like that.
[Guest]: And I oftentimes wouldn't sense even that other people who are not as communicative
[Guest]: as me had something to say and weren't able to say it.
[Guest]: So I don't know how far I've progressed along, but I like to think that now I realize that
[Guest]: just because someone is not saying something does not mean that they don't have anything
[Guest]: to say.
[Guest]: And it's very difficult, very important to get that out of them, even if it's difficult
[Guest]: for those people.
[Guest]: And it makes a life richer.
[Guest]: So one thing that I learned was communication skills and intelligence are not correlated.
[Guest]: So I have found some really clever and intelligent people who are not really able to communicate
[Guest]: at all.
[Guest]: So that was a finding.
[Guest]: I wouldn't have, because I just equated communication and intelligence.
[Guest]: So if you can't communicate, you are dumb.
[Guest]: That was my earlier thing.
[Guest]: Over a period of time, I realized that that is not the case.
[Guest]: I don't know how your experience is.
[Guest]: You are pretty much in the same boat.
[Amit Varma]: No, I'm in a worse boat because I'm in a worse boat because I think, you know, it took me
[Amit Varma]: many years into my adulthood, which is why I don't like the young me.
[Amit Varma]: When I think of me in my twenties and people I knew then are still in touch on Facebook
[Amit Varma]: or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And I think to myself that why?
[Amit Varma]: Because that guy was such an obnoxious prick.
[Amit Varma]: But I realized looking back, and these are things that you realize only in hindsight
[Amit Varma]: if at all, that I picked up two things that makes me cringe when I think back on them
[Amit Varma]: from my parents.
[Amit Varma]: One was, I think, an intellectual arrogance, which you mentioned from my dad, because again,
[Amit Varma]: you know, as a kid, like I, you know, read all of Shakespeare at 10 and I was just reading
[Amit Varma]: very voraciously and that that makes you think the world of yourself and my dad was similar
[Amit Varma]: in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: And I picked up this massive intellectual arrogance that took years and years to kind
[Amit Varma]: of go away.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, and just looking back, I wonder how I kind of navigated through society with
[Amit Varma]: that kind of arrogance.
[Amit Varma]: And from my mom, I think I picked up this massive social arrogance that, you know, we
[Amit Varma]: are a certain class of people.
[Amit Varma]: And my dad was an IAS officer and obviously, you know, privileged upbringing and all living
[Amit Varma]: in bungalows in my childhood, though never since, obviously.
[Amit Varma]: But so there was that and it takes a long time for that to go.
[Amit Varma]: And when that goes, you kind of realize that, you know, that you lost so much by being like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's so true.
[Guest]: You realize you are the bigger because you have your arrogance has created these barriers.
[Guest]: You are not listening and you become so forbidding that other people do not want to speak to
[Guest]: you or they're intimidated by your presence.
[Guest]: There can be nothing sadder than that, actually.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So that that was one of the yeah, I'm happy to meet, I know that someone else also has
[Guest]: gone through that.
[Guest]: But it took me a long time to figure that out.
[Guest]: It's probably still there at some level, it's just, it's just who we are, right?
[Guest]: We are basically very arrogant and selfish people.
[Guest]: But as you grow older, I think you sort of grudgingly acknowledge that you're not as
[Guest]: great as you think you are.
[Guest]: And other people are actually far, far more, you know, smart and clever and talented than
[Guest]: you ever suspected they would.
[Amit Varma]: And I think the other sort of sort of way of thinking about this is that even if you
[Amit Varma]: are smarter than others, even if you're, you know, better than so many, like, it doesn't
[Amit Varma]: make a difference.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I see so much of what happens around me in society and maybe exacerbated by social
[Amit Varma]: media.
[Amit Varma]: There is this constant one upmanship, there is this and which, you know, normally is by
[Amit Varma]: putting other people down, or there is a quest for constant validation.
[Amit Varma]: And these two are kind of colliding all the time, like if there's something that I really
[Amit Varma]: hate about social media, it's about how, you know, you're shitting on people all the time.
[Amit Varma]: And I see that even on some WhatsApp groups, you know, we may both be part of something
[Amit Varma]: like that.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, we don't do that.
[Amit Varma]: But we may be part of a group like that, where, you know, it's all the time you're shitting
[Amit Varma]: on someone.
[Amit Varma]: And it's like endless quote tweets.
[Amit Varma]: Like for me, the quote tweet is just the rudest thing ever, unless you're praising someone,
[Amit Varma]: in which case is fine.
[Amit Varma]: You're praising someone or you're citing someone's piece and saying something.
[Amit Varma]: But a lot of the time, it's just mockery, you're not adding anything to any conversation.
[Amit Varma]: You're just mocking someone for having different values than you, or maybe for not understanding
[Amit Varma]: something enough.
[Amit Varma]: And I think at the end of the day, all of this shit is an accident, your intelligence,
[Amit Varma]: what you've achieved in life, it's an accident.
[Guest]: That's a very good point because, yes, you know, some people are smarter, some people
[Guest]: are less smart.
[Guest]: It's just like some people are taller and other people aren't just as tall.
[Guest]: It's just variations.
[Guest]: It should not, it really doesn't mean anything at all.
[Guest]: It really doesn't.
[Guest]: And actually, as someone pointed out, if you compare the difference between the dumbest
[Guest]: person and smartest person, it's really not much as, you know, if you compare it from
[Guest]: a baseline of, you know, from another animal, from, let us say, a chimpanzee to a human
[Guest]: being, that delta is really big.
[Guest]: So in percentage terms, that little ripple doesn't matter at all.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, that's a good perspective because I think, you know, basically we are all, we
[Amit Varma]: are actually identical and everything is kind of circumstance and a circumstance in two
[Amit Varma]: ways.
[Amit Varma]: One is a circumstance of your genes, which is luck.
[Amit Varma]: And the other is a circumstance of your circumstances, as it were, what a convoluted way, which is
[Amit Varma]: also luck.
[Amit Varma]: You know, like I love Steven Pinker's quote about, you know, nature gives you knobs, nurture
[Amit Varma]: turns them.
[Amit Varma]: And they're both kind of luck.
[Amit Varma]: And that's one of the big lessons I kind of got as a poker player is that realizing that
[Amit Varma]: it's not just in poker where you have to adjust for the level of luck, because obviously though
[Amit Varma]: it's a game of skill, the quantum of luck is much higher than in other sports, but in
[Amit Varma]: life itself.
[Amit Varma]: And so many people get, you know, they let success get to their heads and they become
[Amit Varma]: arrogant, or even the circumstance of their birth, get to their heads, I am so proud of
[Amit Varma]: being so and so proud to be a Hindu.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: What did you do?
[Guest]: You know, what do you do to become a Hindu?
[Amit Varma]: You know, if someone who is proud to be a Hindu today, it's a circumstance of birth
[Amit Varma]: that they are a Hindu in India, what if they were, you know, you know, something else somewhere,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what is the damn difference, but anyway, that's, that's kind of taking us into
[Amit Varma]: different places.
[Amit Varma]: But then, so there's the other thing I mentioned on social media, people do two things.
[Amit Varma]: One is this constant upmanship, and which probably comes from a deep fundamental insecurity.
[Amit Varma]: But there is also the quest for validation, which I think comes from again, one of the
[Amit Varma]: fundamental anxieties that I learned to tackle, and I'm still learning to tackle, which is
[Amit Varma]: hardwired into us, which is the anxiety of what other people will think of you.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, so when I talk to my writing students, when I give my last webinar, I keep
[Amit Varma]: pointing out that this anxiety is actually pointless, because no one's thinking of you.
[Amit Varma]: Everyone's got their head up their own ass, you know, no one is like taking screenshots
[Amit Varma]: of every little thing you write so that they can come back five years later and say, look
[Amit Varma]: what a bad sentence you wrote.
[Amit Varma]: And yet this is a difficult anxiety to get by what other people think of you.
[Amit Varma]: So is this something that you've kind of faced and are there other anxieties?
[Amit Varma]: If you were to think back on things that you've been anxious about, insecure about, what would
[Guest]: you kind of look at?
[Guest]: Yeah, one thing that somehow has dogged me for a long period of time is acceptance, right?
[Guest]: So somehow, you feel whenever you're in a group, you feel obliged to be accepted in
[Guest]: that group.
[Guest]: So oftentimes, what it means is, you say things which go against your core value, or you refrain
[Guest]: from saying things when you should actually say them.
[Guest]: So excessive politeness just in order to fit into the group.
[Guest]: In my case, that definitely comes from, I don't know why it should be true, why it should
[Guest]: be so, because I'm definitely among the privileged, I mean, my dad was a successful practitioner,
[Guest]: we had, you know, socially acceptable, there's absolutely no reason why I should be anxious
[Guest]: about being accepted in a group.
[Guest]: Sheila often points out that I am not unlike a, you know, so when you go to someone's house
[Guest]: and their dog will come out and they're very happy to see you and, you know, so we have
[Guest]: a dog in the factory and we feed and every time one of us goes there because we feed
[Guest]: the dog, he's, you know, he's like, you can see that he's so, he just wants to be petted
[Guest]: by you.
[Guest]: He just wants to be, you know, good book.
[Guest]: And actually, Sheila has a secret name for that particular dog.
[Guest]: She calls him Naren because he's exactly like how I behave when I'm in groups.
[Guest]: That's a private joke between the two of us.
[Guest]: But this is what happens.
[Guest]: So we let anxieties, I try to consciously be away from that.
[Guest]: And but oftentimes, I don't have, I pass it off as kindness, why do I want to hurt other
[Guest]: people's feelings and so, but yeah, we do tend to be disproportionately worried about
[Guest]: being accepted in groups.
[Guest]: And I have found that even if your views, if my views are not in line with other people,
[Guest]: it's not that the group throws me out or rejects me, it's as long as you're not actively harassing
[Guest]: other people, it's fine.
[Guest]: I mean, most groups do accommodate diverse views.
[Guest]: So we should try to be more true to ourselves, it's more satisfying.
[Guest]: You have an internal code, and you must be true to that.
[Guest]: I don't know how your experience is.
[Guest]: You have been, I know, you have been very daring in sort of disagreeing or sort of making
[Guest]: your views known, even when you know that those views are not going to be well received.
[Guest]: You never shy away from that, at least as far as I've known you.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And that's more an impulse kind of thing.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, there's that old XKCD cartoon of, you know, someone is wrong on the internet.
[Unknown]: The wife asks her husband, you know, come and sleep and he's like, no, someone is wrong
[Amit Varma]: on the internet.
[Amit Varma]: And, and there's a later version of that, I think, which came out 10 years after that,
[Amit Varma]: which is about how this guy, you know, discovers sort of, I'll try and link to both of them
[Amit Varma]: about how this guy discovers that there's a view that he disagrees with really strongly,
[Amit Varma]: but he hasn't actually seen that view yet.
[Amit Varma]: So he looks for someone who's expressed that view so he can shit on that person.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, I don't, I don't come close to doing either of those two.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, sometimes somebody will just say something stupid, like someone will
[Amit Varma]: say homeopathy works, and something just happens that, you know, I kind of lose it, or, you
[Amit Varma]: know, other random things.
[Amit Varma]: And over time, it's really futile, that on the one hand, okay, if you are someone who
[Amit Varma]: is taken seriously by a lot of people, then you should kind of say what you feel.
[Amit Varma]: That's kind of your job.
[Amit Varma]: At the very least, you should, whatever you say should be what you feel.
[Amit Varma]: Don't do any posturing.
[Amit Varma]: I try to avoid the posturing.
[Amit Varma]: But I just think, but, you know, but sometimes in private groups also, I just kind of, so
[Amit Varma]: I'm trying to sort of discipline myself to just chill.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I'm more and more, I'm kind of coming to the conclusion that nothing is going to
[Guest]: change.
[Guest]: That's very true.
[Guest]: But I'm in, so I'm like the diametrical opposite of you.
[Guest]: So you would tend to, you know, risk hurting someone else's feeling.
[Guest]: Because you have to say that what you're saying, I don't agree with.
[Guest]: And here are the reasons why I don't agree with it.
[Guest]: You're always civil.
[Guest]: I mean, it's, you'll never, for example, you'll never, you'll never attack the person.
[Guest]: You'll never say that, hey, Naren, you're an idiot.
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: You'll say, these arguments that you're making sound wrong to me.
[Guest]: And these are the reasons why.
[Guest]: And yet, if I'm really invested in those ideas, the very fact that you have pointed that out
[Guest]: to me is an affront.
[Guest]: And I'm going to attack you as a person.
[Guest]: So I'm going to say you are a fat, slob, ugly, which you're not, okay.
[Guest]: But just saying.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, the fatness is undeniable.
[Amit Varma]: The ugly is subjective.
[Amit Varma]: Slob is true.
[Guest]: And I would say, I would think that and I would never talk to Amit again.
[Guest]: So you probably sense that.
[Guest]: But you've said that regardless, you know, when you pointed out that I'm wrong, you've
[Guest]: been prepared to lose that relationship, and I'm the other extreme, I will not say what
[Guest]: actually is crying out to be said, because I'm scared that I will lose my, you know,
[Guest]: Amit is my friend, so I mustn't say and what if he doesn't talk to me.
[Guest]: So both extremes are possibly not right, but I would rather be on your extreme than mine.
[Guest]: I'm working on it.
[Guest]: I point out, so we recently we had a right wing guy on the, very xenophobic guy on one
[Guest]: of our WhatsApp groups, and I, so he left the group in a huff because of something someone
[Guest]: else said.
[Guest]: And then everyone wanted to bring him back.
[Guest]: I said, if this guy comes back, I'm out.
[Guest]: Because I don't agree with, you know, these, the things that he said.
[Guest]: And everyone was like, no, no, he's our friend from college, and we should take him back
[Guest]: and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And then they did bring him back and I didn't leave the group.
[Guest]: But I have chosen never to participate again on that.
[Guest]: It triggers me.
[Guest]: What I actually should have done was vocally protested when he was brought back.
[Guest]: He should know that the views he espouses are not nice views.
[Guest]: But it's impossible to, it's my, so there is this, I don't know, have you, are you familiar
[Guest]: with that Bonhoeffer's theory of stupidity?
[Guest]: No, please tell me.
[Guest]: There's this guy named Dieter Bonhoeffer, okay.
[Guest]: So Dieter Bonhoeffer was a young pastor, very touching story, actually.
[Guest]: He was a very, he was a pastor, he was, you know, he like spreading the word of Christ.
[Guest]: And he believed, he believed in the message of the Bible.
[Guest]: So when Hitler was gaining prominence, he protested, he saw when, this is what used
[Guest]: to happen, right?
[Guest]: So people used to, Hitler used to say, Jews are the cause of all your problems.
[Guest]: And people would go and throw stones at Jewish shops and they would do that.
[Guest]: So this is way before, you know, concentration camps and all the thing.
[Guest]: But you know, they used to, they used to do those things.
[Guest]: And Dieter Bonhoeffer used to go and give speeches and tell people that this is wrong,
[Guest]: you cannot do this.
[Guest]: This is not, this is not what, and you know, a lot of the ire against Jews comes from Christian
[Guest]: history about, you know, they were not kind to Christ.
[Guest]: I don't know what the background is, but generally, historically, Jews, Christians hate Jews because
[Guest]: of bad things that the Jews did to the Christians, so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And Bonhoeffer used to say all that, anyway.
[Guest]: So none of it worked, Nazism grew and eventually they, you know, they took power and World
[Guest]: War started and some years after that, Bonhoeffer was like, you know, going around saying things
[Guest]: and they finally arrested him and they put him in a concentration camp.
[Guest]: And tragically, just two weeks before the regime collapsed, before the Allies won, Bonhoeffer
[Guest]: was executed for being in on a plot to kill Hitler, which he wasn't, but they, you know,
[Guest]: that happened.
[Guest]: And but when he was in the prison, he wrote a book.
[Guest]: The book was about stupidity and his point was stupidity is worse than malevolence because
[Guest]: malevolence has an agenda and you can unmask that agenda, but stupidity has no agenda whatsoever
[Guest]: and stupid people will do things to harm you which don't benefit them.
[Guest]: A malevolent person will not do that.
[Guest]: He will harm you only if it benefits him.
[Guest]: So his basic thesis was, be very afraid of stupid people and stay away from them.
[Guest]: And to some extent, I see this happening even today.
[Guest]: I don't think we'll ever go into that level of extreme, but it happened all over the world.
[Guest]: It happens here, it happens in the US, you have this QAnon crowd, they are just stupid
[Guest]: people and you have to sort of strengthen your fellow people, people around you to recognize
[Guest]: that stupidity and sort of fight against it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this whole thing of stupidity being worse than malevolence reminds me of Harry
[Amit Varma]: Frankfurt and bullshit.
[Amit Varma]: Harry Frankfurt is a philosopher who wrote this great book called On Bullshit.
[Amit Varma]: And his point was that bullshit is different from lies.
[Amit Varma]: A liar appreciates that there is something that is a fact, but he deliberately lies.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas a bullshitter doesn't give a shit.
[Amit Varma]: So half the time he might even be right.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: He is just bullshitting.
[Amit Varma]: He is just making up what comes into his head to go with whatever the narrative is.
[Amit Varma]: And he's not aware himself that it's true.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Like Donald Trump was a classic bullshitter in that sense, that he will say anything.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, that's more dangerous than lies.
[Guest]: You cannot expose that as a lie.
[Guest]: So a lie is clearly a lie.
[Guest]: So you knew that it was black, but you said it's white.
[Guest]: That's a lie.
[Guest]: Bullshitter, he doesn't even know.
[Amit Varma]: No.
[Amit Varma]: And a bullshitter takes you into crazy directions.
[Amit Varma]: Like there is this SSR conspiracy theory that I like to speak about, which is see the initial
[Amit Varma]: SSR theories were lies, right?
[Amit Varma]: The initial conspiracy theories that, you know, Rhea gave him drugs and there was all
[Amit Varma]: this other shit happening.
[Amit Varma]: Those were lies.
[Amit Varma]: But the bullshit is crazy.
[Amit Varma]: The bullshit is that he believed in something in quantum mechanics, which splits an atom
[Amit Varma]: into two.
[Amit Varma]: And he apparently tweeted about it once.
[Amit Varma]: So he split himself into two.
[Amit Varma]: And there were two SSRs and the one that died or was killed rather was a duplicate.
[Amit Varma]: And the real one invented Covaxin and is in hiding somewhere because Yogi Adityanath is
[Amit Varma]: looking for him.
[Amit Varma]: Now, none of this is a lie and none of this is something a liar would say.
[Amit Varma]: A liar would have no incentive at just going into these different crazy areas.
[Amit Varma]: This is just bullshit of a very strange kind.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, just going back to the earlier point of not speaking out and, you know, more
[Amit Varma]: and more.
[Amit Varma]: I think that sometimes a practical attitude is not my circus, not my monkeys or as a better
[Amit Varma]: way of saying this comes from the novel Kashi Kasi, which is Bhaar Mein Jaye Duniya Hum
[Guest]: Bhajaye Harmonia.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Which is, in fact, I really want to this, this should be a T-shirt and it should be
[Guest]: part of seen unseen merchandise is what I strongly believe.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I think the first bunch of merchandise, which is all these mugs actually didn't make
[Amit Varma]: any profit.
[Amit Varma]: So it was just a random brand building exercise.
[Amit Varma]: But we shall see in future.
[Amit Varma]: But then, you know, you got to do what you got to do.
[Amit Varma]: You know, if if one stops oneself from saying what, you know, then then why say anything
[Amit Varma]: at all?
[Amit Varma]: It kind of comes down to that.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, something interesting that you kind of said about, you know, the marriage
[Amit Varma]: years, the whole spousal thing that after a while you kind of know each other because
[Unknown]: everything is done.
[Amit Varma]: And that reminded me of this beautiful poem by my favorite poet Mark Strand, which I'll
[Amit Varma]: read out.
[Amit Varma]: It's a prose poem.
[Amit Varma]: So it's called Harmony in the Boudoir by Mark Strand.
[Amit Varma]: After years of marriage, he stands at the foot of the bed and tells his wife that she
[Amit Varma]: will never know him, that for everything he says, there is more that he does not say,
[Amit Varma]: that behind each word he utters there is another word and hundreds more behind that one.
[Amit Varma]: All those unsaid words, he says, contain his true self, which has been betrayed by the
[Amit Varma]: superficial self before her.
[Amit Varma]: So you see, he says, kicking off his slippers, I am more than what I have led you to believe
[Amit Varma]: I am.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, you silly man, says his wife.
[Amit Varma]: Of course you are.
[Amit Varma]: I find it just thinking of you having so many cells receding into nothingness is very exciting
[Amit Varma]: that you barely exist as you are.
[Amit Varma]: Couldn't please me more.
[Amit Varma]: It's not good.
[Amit Varma]: I kind of love this.
[Amit Varma]: And this also leads me to the question is that how much of ourselves, what we think
[Amit Varma]: we are, is constructed for ourselves?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is that something that you think about?
[Amit Varma]: Do you sometimes think that that I'm just being dishonest?
[Amit Varma]: I'm just putting a face out there that I don't know if there's a real me.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I don't know if anyone has a real me in that sense, that the self is always
[Amit Varma]: a sort of a construction and for others and oneself, if that makes any sense to you.
[Guest]: So one of the things, I've never mustered up the courage to do this and probably won't.
[Guest]: But they say that if you do acid or mushrooms, psilocybin mushrooms, these are chemicals
[Guest]: that dissolve your sense of self and transform you as a person.
[Guest]: So the self is a really it's a construct and like almost all of mystical philosophy is,
[Guest]: you know, is about that and about how to see the world.
[Guest]: So I've struggled with this.
[Guest]: I've had spiritual insights.
[Guest]: I used to do this thing where I used to sit in front of a mirror and stare at myself.
[Guest]: And if you do this long enough, you just stare at yourself.
[Guest]: Just don't close your eyes.
[Guest]: Do nothing.
[Guest]: Just sit.
[Guest]: Ideally, sit in front of keep a mirror, preferably a full length mirror.
[Guest]: Just keep staring at yourself.
[Guest]: And after some time, you'll suddenly have this thing, you know, it's very fleeting.
[Guest]: It'll come and it'll go.
[Guest]: But for that fleeting moment, it will be, is it really me?
[Guest]: You know, what am I?
[Guest]: Who am I?
[Guest]: Kind of thing.
[Guest]: And unfortunately, it is nowhere as transformative as they say acid or those mushrooms are.
[Guest]: But it's true that these constructs that we make for ourselves define everything that
[Guest]: I personally believe that what we are trying to do, all of us, is we are trying to be internally
[Guest]: consistent is what I think.
[Guest]: So we, even people who have just absolutely the most absurd, untrue, even people like
[Guest]: Donald Trump, somewhere internally, they have some consistent image of it.
[Guest]: And they hang on to it because if that breaks, everything is gone for them.
[Guest]: But for most of us, it's probably desirable that it breaks and you start seeing things
[Guest]: as they are or as they are from other.
[Guest]: I haven't, I haven't really succeeded in doing any of this.
[Guest]: I've tried.
[Guest]: I don't have the slightest idea how to go about it.
[Guest]: I don't know if you had any experiences or experiments in this direction.
[Amit Varma]: No, not at all.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, Sam Harris keeps talking about meditation and psychedelic drugs, how they both get you
[Amit Varma]: past the sense of the self.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, the whole idea of meditation is that it can take you kind of above yourself
[Amit Varma]: to a meta level where you can view yourself doing the things you do and thinking the things
[Amit Varma]: you think and realizing that this is also a narrative, that, you know, on Twitter you
[Amit Varma]: posture for others, but over here, you're also posturing for yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And that's an interesting and kind of scary realization.
[Amit Varma]: I once did go for this Vipashyana camp when I was very young in my 20s.
[Amit Varma]: And so, you know, you got to stay silent for all those 10 days or whatever it is.
[Amit Varma]: And it was horrible in the sense that it was horrible with one food related, you know,
[Amit Varma]: good feeling at the end of it.
[Amit Varma]: But it was horrible because after day two, my head was just full of sexual fantasies.
[Amit Varma]: So I was observing myself having sexual fantasies and for days that is just terrible.
[Guest]: It was nonsense.
[Guest]: Have you ever tried mindfulness meditation?
[Amit Varma]: I have since tried it.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is that I haven't been mindful enough while trying it.
[Guest]: I same with me.
[Guest]: I haven't been.
[Guest]: I keep telling my every time I have this conversation with different people, I mentally make a note
[Guest]: that from tomorrow morning, I'm going to start that.
[Amit Varma]: I've never gotten around to that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I downloaded the Headspace app, I downloaded Sam Harris's app and kind of paid a subscription
[Amit Varma]: fee for it for a few months before this RBI regulation, it just lapsed.
[Amit Varma]: I wasn't using it anyway.
[Amit Varma]: But to get back to the Vipashyana, the interesting thing was because the whole exercise is that
[Amit Varma]: you're observing yourself, the meal I had after that, you know, my wife would also done
[Amit Varma]: the thing and it wasn't so bad for her.
[Amit Varma]: After that, we went to an Italian restaurant, I remember for a meal after we kind of got
[Amit Varma]: back from Igatpuri where it was.
[Amit Varma]: And it was a spectacular meal.
[Amit Varma]: And it was a spectacular meal, not because it was a spectacular meal, but because I could
[Amit Varma]: taste every little nuance of that, like every little nuance of that I could taste.
[Amit Varma]: My senses were so acute, and I was like, ki haan yaar, aise khana chahiye.
[Amit Varma]: But then you're, you know, back to normal by the next meal, and you don't even know
[Amit Varma]: what you ate by the end of it, you know, chicken khaya, mutton khaya, and you finish the food
[Guest]: and you're like.
[Guest]: But I do believe, especially after reading Sam Harris, who is a terrific writer, actually,
[Guest]: very, very nice, very simple words.
[Guest]: I do believe, no evidence for that, just because these people say so, that it is possible to
[Guest]: be mindful, it's very easy to be mindful, and it's something that all of us should do.
[Guest]: And these are the things, so whenever, whatever you're doing, one thing that, you know, both
[Guest]: of us have experienced, it might be also partly my fault, because I ramble a lot.
[Guest]: But when you talk, you oftentimes lose the thread of what you're talking, because part
[Guest]: of your mind has gone off into some other rabbit hole.
[Guest]: And then you're trying to pull it back, and then you lost the thread of the first one,
[Guest]: or the second one, and then all of a sudden, you don't know what you've been talking about.
[Guest]: And I'm sure a mindful person, you know, for a mindful person, that wouldn't.
[Amit Varma]: It wouldn't, but it would also be tough, because it's a question of attentional capacity, in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that, like, this is something I realized while podcasting, that why do, how
[Amit Varma]: can people listen at double speed or 3x speed so easily?
[Amit Varma]: And the reason is the brain can comprehend words spoken at 500 words a minute or more,
[Amit Varma]: while we actually speak at, you know, 150 to 200 words a minute.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you know, when you're listening to someone speaking at that horrifyingly slow
[Amit Varma]: speed, like, I can't listen to myself at normal speed, it's torture.
[Guest]: Same with me.
[Guest]: I, you know, in fact, I whenever I listen to your podcast, I listen to it at 1.5x, that's
[Guest]: my standard thing.
[Guest]: And you sound normal.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And the other day, I listened to one of your podcasts, and accidentally it happened to
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: It's a new podcasting app, I think, and it almost sounds that you're intoxicated or something
[Amit Varma]: like that.
[Amit Varma]: Retarded.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: But now, I mean, we are face to face now, and it, it doesn't sound odd at all.
[Guest]: But I'm pretty sure that when I listen to this podcast, when it comes out, I will have
[Guest]: to listen to it at 1.5x, I won't be able to listen.
[Amit Varma]: The exact same thing.
[Amit Varma]: So some of my writing students, when they, you know, the first webinar of the course,
[Amit Varma]: they pointed out that you seem to be speaking so slowly, because they're just not kind of
[Amit Varma]: used to it.
[Amit Varma]: But that's the point.
[Amit Varma]: That's why when you're talking to someone, their attention can wander, because only a
[Amit Varma]: part of the brain needs to listen to you to comprehend, the rest of it can do whatever
[Amit Varma]: the hell it wants.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the mind wanders a lot, which is why, you know, listening at like, I listen
[Amit Varma]: to everything at 2x, and some things at 2.5, or whatever, sometimes it depends on the accent
[Amit Varma]: and how will you get it, but I would never listen to my podcast at less than 2x.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, it's normal at that speed for me, you know, otherwise, the mind will
[Amit Varma]: wander, you know, listening at a higher speed can actually mean that you kind of retain
[Amit Varma]: more and take in more and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me another thing.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, you were born in the 60s, grew up in the 70s and 80s, and all of that, and
[Amit Varma]: a lot of our experiences, kind of a shared experience.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, and I've kind of grown up reading books.
[Amit Varma]: And once in a while, you watch some TV, or you go out and watch a movie, but you're really
[Amit Varma]: reading books.
[Amit Varma]: And you're listening to music sometimes and all of that, not today, that entire experience
[Amit Varma]: has changed.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I find that number one, you know, we no longer need to think in terms of formats.
[Amit Varma]: Like earlier, if you wanted to be a writer, you're going to write an article that's 800
[Amit Varma]: words, you're going to write a book that's 100,000, a short story is whatever, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you've got these fixed formats.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, for audio, you know, if you want to do audio back in the day, you know, radio
[Amit Varma]: has this fixed formats, TV has this fixed formats, either you're a half an hour serial
[Amit Varma]: episode, or you're a 90 minute Hollywood film, or you're a three hour Bollywood film, everything
[Amit Varma]: has a format.
[Amit Varma]: Today, I find as a creator, and you're also a creator, obviously, you're a podcaster,
[Amit Varma]: and we'll discuss your future later, because we must talk about your future, because I'm
[Amit Varma]: also a part of it, I've now realized.
[Amit Varma]: And today, it has completely sort of changing, like, what are your thoughts on this?
[Amit Varma]: And what are the changes that you've seen in the things that you consume, like a lot
[Amit Varma]: of people now who don't have time to read books, because lives are busy.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, everybody doesn't have the privilege to be able to carve out hours in
[Amit Varma]: a day to read.
[Amit Varma]: People listen to audiobooks, or will listen to podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: Because the point is, you want knowledge wherever you're getting it from, you want stimulation
[Amit Varma]: from your brain, wherever you're getting it from, you know, I find a good podcast is a
[Amit Varma]: perfectly valid way to get it, which wasn't, you know, there when I was a kid.
[Guest]: So what are your kind of thoughts on this?
[Guest]: So one, one is, I've, I've, you know, I used to be an inveterate readers, I'd read anything.
[Guest]: And I had to be reading all the time.
[Guest]: I used to read my, my mom used to make fun of me, I used to read while I could not eat
[Guest]: without reading.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd have a book, I'd read something.
[Guest]: And they would, you know, my sisters would do that while I'm eating, while I'm reading,
[Guest]: they'll pull my plate away, and I'll actually put my hand out and there'll be something,
[Guest]: you know, missing.
[Guest]: And I look up and then all of them are laughing, they made a fool out of me.
[Guest]: And now I find myself not reading nearly like a 10th as much.
[Guest]: But so the biggest change has been YouTube.
[Guest]: So I've been I've been consuming content a lot on YouTube, it started with the math video.
[Guest]: So I'm a mechanical engineer, and a lot of mechanical engineering is calculus and a lot
[Guest]: of calculus is very hard to visualize.
[Guest]: Now we, we've done that, and we don't really use calculus in day to day manufacturing,
[Guest]: but it's something which always interested me.
[Guest]: But a lot of a lot of calculus, for example, there are things called differential equations.
[Guest]: Differential equations are basically equations that describe some physical phenomenon, you
[Guest]: just put it into that equation, and they are all in the form of derivatives.
[Guest]: And if you want solution, you have to solve those differential equations, and they're
[Guest]: notoriously hard to solve.
[Guest]: But there are techniques, there are things called Laplace transform, Fourier transform,
[Guest]: they, they help you solve a lot of these things by, you know, making transformations.
[Guest]: For example, Laplace transform transforms everything into the frequency domain from
[Guest]: the time domain where, you know, you can just add things algebraically, you can solve things
[Guest]: algebraically, and then you transform it back into the time domain, and you get your solution.
[Guest]: All of this we have done, and not understood what the hell it was.
[Guest]: Many many many years later, I find this channel on YouTube called 3blue1brown, which does
[Guest]: such a wonderful way, I just saw that it was a 30 minute video, and I knew for the first
[Guest]: time in my life, what a Laplace transform actually did.
[Guest]: And my respect for old Laplace grew, because he figured this out in the 17th or 18th century.
[Guest]: And I was hooked.
[Guest]: So then, you know, I started Khan Academy, anything, you know, hundreds of things, probability,
[Guest]: we all talk about probability.
[Guest]: There was this thing about Bayesian, I give talks about Bayesian theorem, Bayesian aspect,
[Guest]: I had no clue what Bayesian was, till I actually saw a few well produced, you know, videos
[Guest]: on YouTube, and then you realize things like Bayesian, it's, you know, it also has some
[Guest]: philosophical sort of implications, how, you know, every time you discover a new fact,
[Guest]: you change your assessment of, you know, situations, things like that.
[Guest]: So that started YouTube, and then after some time, it went beyond that, and it just became
[Guest]: fun, right?
[Guest]: So YouTube is a different dimension of fun, it says.
[Guest]: So there are vlogs, there are people doing funny things, there's one YouTube channel
[Guest]: I see, I, for no discernible reason, they just take melted metal and pour it into different
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: And just they melt some aluminium or melt some iron, they pour it into things and see
[Guest]: what happens.
[Guest]: It's all kind of thing, it's a completely different dimension, there's no, I cannot
[Guest]: imagine any circumstance in which anyone could write a book about these things.
[Guest]: But these channels do exist, they're very popular on YouTube.
[Guest]: And I think at least YouTube is the only one I have, I don't understand Instagram at all.
[Guest]: I am on Instagram, and I follow a lot of people, but I'm mystified as to its purpose.
[Guest]: They just post pictures of themselves, and you're just supposed to like them.
[Guest]: And what I mean, I don't understand, what are your views on emergent social media?
[Amit Varma]: I haven't used Instagram much.
[Amit Varma]: I think the purpose is this, like it's what we spoke about earlier, that what draws me
[Amit Varma]: towards a creator is a personal, you feel that you know the person, and then you're
[Amit Varma]: drawn into their story.
[Amit Varma]: And then you're kind of hooked into it, right?
[Amit Varma]: That's what draws one to creators.
[Amit Varma]: And I think Instagram is kind of an extension of that, that you're doing shit, like a story
[Amit Varma]: I kind of sometimes talk about is like last year, you know, chess, YouTube kind of exploded.
[Amit Varma]: And there's this comedian called Samera and he did a bunch of stuff and chess YouTube
[Amit Varma]: kind of exploded.
[Amit Varma]: So there was a day when, and there's a guy called Sagar Shah, who, you know, runs ChessBase
[Amit Varma]: India.
[Amit Varma]: ChessBase is this old venerable magazine from Germany, he runs the India version of it.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, downstream of Samera, his YouTube channel started doing very well, the ChessBase
[Amit Varma]: channel.
[Amit Varma]: So they had a live stream.
[Amit Varma]: And it was very interesting because the live stream was supposed to offer of an event,
[Amit Varma]: where they were doing live commentary of an event and was supposed to start at a particular
[Amit Varma]: time, and the guy realizes five minutes before that his internet isn't working at home.
[Amit Varma]: But this is during COVID time, but the ChessBase office is five minutes away in Goregaon or
[Amit Varma]: wherever this is.
[Amit Varma]: So he picks up his laptop and camera and all the equipment, Mike Shaikh, and he runs to
[Amit Varma]: his office physically, and he starts it a couple of minutes late, but he starts it.
[Amit Varma]: And then the thing is happening.
[Amit Varma]: And then his wife is at home where the internet has come back.
[Amit Varma]: So she joins, she's a co-commentator, and the event ends.
[Amit Varma]: And then some of the players who played in that event, top grandmasters, they join in.
[Amit Varma]: And so what would have been like a three hour stream becomes a six hour stream where they're
[Amit Varma]: just talking, right?
[Amit Varma]: And it's great.
[Amit Varma]: It's riveting.
[Amit Varma]: You've got 10s of 1000s of people who are watching this live stream, where the chess
[Amit Varma]: is over.
[Amit Varma]: It's just riveting.
[Amit Varma]: And then at about three or four in the morning, young Sagar reveals that in the in that particular
[Amit Varma]: area, the streets are full of these dogs, and he's scared of walking home now because
[Amit Varma]: he's got to go home.
[Amit Varma]: So there's one reader saying in the live chat, hey, I'll come and I'll drive you home and
[Amit Varma]: all of that shit is happening, but he decides to walk home.
[Amit Varma]: But because everybody is so scared, worried about him now, they want to make sure he gets
[Amit Varma]: home safely.
[Amit Varma]: So he switches off the YouTube stream, and he starts streaming on Instagram, he does
[Amit Varma]: an Instagram live.
[Amit Varma]: And then all of these people switch from YouTube to Instagram, and they follow his journey
[Amit Varma]: home.
[Amit Varma]: You know, just seeing that whole thing unfold is fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, Instagram is more useful for things apart from this.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess the only way to really know is to dive into it.
[Amit Varma]: Because I just think that every medium, including podcasting, that if you just look at it from
[Amit Varma]: the outside as a superficial thing, it seems like it seems very banal, like in the early
[Amit Varma]: days of blogging, people would say, Oh, who wants to know what you had for breakfast as
[Amit Varma]: if that is what blogging was.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, so now I've gone through, I've gone on many YouTube rabbit holes, I haven't
[Amit Varma]: gone through any, I'm not on Instagram, I mean, I opened an account once, but zero posts,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore nobody knows what it is, you know, maybe someday I'll go there.
[Amit Varma]: But just, you know, in case listeners are confused, what do I mean by Naren's creative
[Amit Varma]: future and all of that, Naren just revealed before we started recording that he's retiring
[Amit Varma]: in a month, yes, people retire, young people, that he's retiring in a month, and we'll focus
[Amit Varma]: on doing interesting creative things.
[Amit Varma]: And I've been planning to start something on YouTube.
[Amit Varma]: So we said that, okay, one of the many things that I'll do is a food blog with my good friend
[Amit Varma]: Naren.
[Amit Varma]: And we can go around and sort of talk about that, because I just feel that India in that
[Amit Varma]: sense is so incredibly diverse, like, you know, Naren earlier mentioned this food trip
[Amit Varma]: that we did.
[Amit Varma]: And we, you know, a bunch of us, I think about eight to 10 of us, we went to Bangalore, went
[Amit Varma]: around Bangalore and did some eating, but basically hired a bus and then went to Mysore.
[Amit Varma]: And in Mysore, did a lot of eating a lot of epic places, including a pork biryani, I will
[Amit Varma]: never forget.
[Amit Varma]: And it was, it was pretty mind blowing, because like you said, Mysore is almost like an Istanbul
[Amit Varma]: of India is a confluence of cultures, Persian, Turkish, you know, Asian, all over the, you
[Amit Varma]: know, it's just, it's just incredible food wise.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't think people have kind of mapped this out enough.
[Guest]: So I'm very excited about, you know, starting off this YouTube thing with you.
[Guest]: Because as we were discussing earlier, it's, it's a medium whose real, you know, real power
[Guest]: really hasn't been explored.
[Guest]: And it's interpretation.
[Guest]: So you sort of, you just find out, and even about food, food as a map of as a snapshot
[Guest]: or a map of our entire being as a, you know, a lot of food also connects cultures in many
[Guest]: ways.
[Guest]: And all of that is very interesting.
[Guest]: And food is actually if you, one thing I realized is a lot of mainstream Indian food is common
[Guest]: across castes or class than region.
[Guest]: So food that Brahmins eat from Kashmir to Kanyakumari will be far more similar than
[Guest]: the food a Brahmin eats and a Dalit eats in the same villages is what I'm guessing.
[Amit Varma]: That's fascinating.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And I don't know if this is an Amche theory or something, which is really the fact, but
[Guest]: it's something I would really like to figure out.
[Guest]: The other thing about lower class food, so I, you know, they're not simply not available
[Guest]: because they are not the restaurant class.
[Guest]: So they just, and it'll be interesting to find out what they eat, what a farmer eats
[Guest]: in Western UP, maybe, you know, what some other community, other caste, it'll be fascinating.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: It's a journey that's intriguing and basically is also fun because eating is very fundamental.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: It's one of our primal impulses and like I did this episode with Peggy Mohan, who's written
[Amit Varma]: this fantastic book on languages, how you can tell history through languages and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, when you mentioned this, how, you know, Brahmins across India will have more commonality
[Amit Varma]: in cuisine than a Brahmin and a Dalit in the same village.
[Amit Varma]: And even across genders, there are interesting differences in language.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that she kind of points out is that, you know, back in the day when
[Amit Varma]: the Aryans came, and by the way, yes, the Aryan migration theory is true.
[Amit Varma]: You can, you know, check out my episode with Tony Joseph or read his brilliant book for
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: I think that is, you know, something we know beyond all doubt that when the Aryans came,
[Amit Varma]: they came in bands of men because that is how explorers go out.
[Amit Varma]: So they took local women as their wives, you know, whether by conquest or consent or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: we don't know, but they took local women as their wives.
[Amit Varma]: And as a consequence for generations, it was a case that the women spoke a separate language
[Amit Varma]: from the men, and it's very interesting to then see that reflected in the evolution of
[Amit Varma]: both languages.
[Amit Varma]: Like there is so much in Sanskrit that has come from local languages.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, one of the consequences of that is that men and women would speak
[Amit Varma]: subtly different languages because the young girls when growing up would spend more time
[Amit Varma]: with the mother and at home, and the boys would be with the mother till sometime and
[Amit Varma]: then they're out in the field with their fathers doing whatever fathers do in the field hunting
[Guest]: or whatever it is.
[Guest]: So the old languages took a really long time to get ironed out and probably never did get
[Guest]: ironed out.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: She speaks about those sounds, right?
[Guest]: So the retroflex sounds.
[Amit Varma]: Retroflex sounds like, you know, dhat and dhat, you know, so dhat is the and the, and
[Amit Varma]: dhat, the and the, where your tongue hits the back of your mouth in the way that it
[Amit Varma]: does are not there in any of the other, you know, Indo-Proto European languages.
[Amit Varma]: It's not there.
[Amit Varma]: So if you follow the Aryan languages journey all the way through, it's not there anywhere
[Amit Varma]: till the Indian subcontinent, where it's clearly something that's kind of come from the local
[Amit Varma]: languages.
[Amit Varma]: And it's to me, that's kind of delightful.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, obviously, there's also a tinge of what were lives like back then was the violence.
[Amit Varma]: But the reason I brought this up is that in the same way as, you know, I find it fascinating
[Amit Varma]: that you can look at something that is static today and tell the past through it, that you
[Amit Varma]: can look at, like, like Tony Joseph writes about in his book, you know, you can look
[Amit Varma]: at, you know, someone's genome, and you can, you know, go back to the past and figure shit
[Amit Varma]: out.
[Amit Varma]: You can look at languages that people speak, and you can tell something about the past
[Amit Varma]: from there.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's got to be true of food as well, except it's probably much more complex,
[Amit Varma]: and much more subtle.
[Amit Varma]: And it's, but there's so much to be done.
[Guest]: Yeah, there's a, that's an entire journey waiting to be made.
[Guest]: So oftentimes, people make journeys like this with agenda.
[Guest]: So the thing to do is to do that journey without an agenda.
[Guest]: So there's no, you have no idea what you're going to find out in the course of doing this
[Guest]: or the end of this.
[Guest]: But it's, it's going to be fun, and it's generally going to be interesting, because always, it
[Guest]: is, you know, these, these are things that interest everyone, where, where you came from,
[Guest]: where other people came from, and how you are connected with each other.
[Guest]: So it's, it's, it's something that really promises to be fun.
[Guest]: So watch this space, everyone.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, watch this space.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I want to throw a lot of things at a YouTube wall, and see what sticks.
[Amit Varma]: The point is, there is this initial nervousness, because there is a halo effect of the podcast.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that because the scene in the unseen now for the last three years or so has been
[Amit Varma]: like a finished product where I really know what I'm doing, and I bring out what I bring
[Amit Varma]: out.
[Amit Varma]: And people, you know, expect a similar quality, whereas I know this is what I tell all creators
[Amit Varma]: that when you do something for the first time, you're going to suck, embrace it, you know,
[Amit Varma]: embrace the sucking, but just suck more, be regular at sucking, have a discipline eventually
[Amit Varma]: through iteration, you'll become much better.
[Amit Varma]: So obviously, when I begin doing my YouTube stuff, I will suck, which is fine, but you
[Amit Varma]: know, except that there might be people who expect me not to suck, which is not fair,
[Amit Varma]: you know, let me suck for a while, and then I'll figure it out.
[Amit Varma]: And if there are any people who'd want to sponsor our specific show, which Naren and
[Amit Varma]: I will do on food, you know, feel free to get in touch.
[Amit Varma]: At this moment of time, we have zero followers on YouTube, because we don't have a YouTube
[Amit Varma]: channel.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, so you know, before we kind of wind up, and you know, one of the things that I've
[Amit Varma]: really loved about knowing you is that, you know, every time we meet, you tell at least
[Amit Varma]: four or five incredible mind blowing stories, some of which you also share on Twitter threads,
[Amit Varma]: which then go viral and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But there's one particular story, and you know, which particular story I'm talking about,
[Amit Varma]: which I love so much, because it says so much about this incredible country that you're
[Amit Varma]: in.
[Amit Varma]: So, so may I invite you to now enlighten my listeners as well.
[Guest]: So this happened, maybe, I don't know, 10, 15, 12 years ago.
[Guest]: So we, Sheila and I, we were doing a powerhouse.
[Guest]: And one of our friends, who was an architect, said that, you know, you could go to China,
[Guest]: buy everything from China, import it, and you'll get a very good deal.
[Guest]: It was very cheap at that point of time, and you have a lot of variety.
[Guest]: So you know, and it was true.
[Guest]: So China has this huge mall where you can buy furniture by theme.
[Guest]: So if you want colonial furniture, and everything, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And just to be clear, you weren't just throwing up your flat, basically the building that
[Guest]: you had, you made a full building with many flats on it, so you were going to furnish
[Guest]: all of them.
[Guest]: Yeah, three flats plus ours.
[Guest]: So we wanted to furnish all those flats.
[Guest]: So we went there, we, you know, we bought all the stuff, everything got loaded onto
[Unknown]: containers.
[Guest]: And so some containers came soon, and it so happened that Sheila and I had planned to
[Guest]: go to Europe at that time, we had planned a vacation there, this had been planned a
[Guest]: long time ago, and you know, tickets had been booked, and hotels had been booked, and it
[Guest]: was going to be the two of us.
[Guest]: And I couldn't, and I think one of the containers hadn't arrived by the time I left.
[Guest]: So my clearing agent said that, you know, no problem.
[Guest]: These are all the papers, you sign everything in advance, and I'll, and you know, he gave
[Guest]: me that there is duty to be paid, so he knew also what duty was going to be, so he paid
[Guest]: all the shipping charges, everything was done, I paid all the money, and I went.
[Guest]: And we are in Paris somewhere, in the middle of the night, the phone rings, and it's my
[Guest]: customs clearing agent, and he says, sir, can you come, you know, are you going to come
[Guest]: in the next couple of hours?
[Guest]: I said, no, we just got here, and we've got this.
[Guest]: So he says, no, there's a problem.
[Guest]: So the problem was as follows, my import-export code number was in the name of Narendra Shenoy.
[Guest]: And for some reason, the guy from China had shipped the material, and it was in the name
[Guest]: of Mr. Narendra Shenoy.
[Guest]: And I needed a notarized affidavit to be submitted, which stated that, to the best of my knowledge,
[Guest]: Narendra Shenoy and Mr. Narendra Shenoy was the same person.
[Guest]: And it had to be notarized, and it had to be signed by me.
[Guest]: So I told him, can you not just, you know, sort of just sign it, he says, no, no, they
[Guest]: check it with your, you know, you have your other signatures and things like that, I can't
[Guest]: do that.
[Guest]: And obviously, I couldn't, I couldn't, I couldn't fly down from Paris, and so I couldn't come.
[Guest]: And when I came back, I had to pay a demerit, I had to pay a nice stiff fine for not being
[Guest]: able to clear my goods, because I wasn't able to produce an affidavit that, to the best
[Guest]: of my knowledge, Narendra Shenoy and Mr. Narendra Shenoy were the same person.
[Guest]: It's been the high point of my life.
[Guest]: And I can't even, most people don't believe it's true, but I, I, unfortunately, I don't
[Guest]: have that affidavit.
[Guest]: Someone, I think you asked me for it.
[Amit Varma]: I wanted that copy of that affidavit.
[Guest]: Yeah, unfortunately, I should have kept it.
[Guest]: It's actually made.
[Guest]: I'm still not clear whether, I used to think that it was the customs department that asked
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: But apparently, it was a shipping company that wanted it before, so I'm still not clear
[Guest]: who exactly asked for that.
[Guest]: But I wrote that affidavit, it's been the high point of my life.
[Guest]: And all my friends now, whenever there is any, you know, doubt about, they always ask
[Guest]: me whether it's Narendra Shenoy or Mr. Narendra Shenoy talking.
[Amit Varma]: It's a lovely story.
[Amit Varma]: It just tells you so much about the Indian system that such a thing actually happened.
[Amit Varma]: It's just complete nuts.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, as we kind of wind up, a few final questions and here's one.
[Amit Varma]: If you were to encounter the 25 year old Narendra Shenoy today, you know, let's say you are
[Amit Varma]: Mr. Narendra Shenoy, what advice would you give him?
[Guest]: So first thing I would say is don't hold back, don't hesitate.
[Guest]: I've been very hesitant in many things that I've done, despite the fact that I've been
[Guest]: impulsive and done a lot of things.
[Guest]: So don't hesitate is one.
[Guest]: And second, I would say is just be kinder to people.
[Guest]: I younger Narendra Shenoy was probably not very kind person.
[Guest]: I would definitely, I wish I was kinder to many people, especially people who are not
[Guest]: up to my sort of expectation in like being clever in speaking.
[Guest]: I've been guilty of judging people on how they speak and now I know that that's not
[Guest]: a full story.
[Guest]: So yeah, these are the two things I think I would advise my younger self.
[Amit Varma]: Is this advice you've given your kids, for example, or do you think they've kind of internalized
[Amit Varma]: it by watching you?
[Guest]: And how has fatherhood changed you?
[Guest]: So my kids, when they were growing up, the general situation in the house was that kids
[Guest]: were kids, and they would do all kinds of silly things.
[Guest]: And I sort of identified with them.
[Guest]: So a lot of my childhood sort of appeared, they would do pranky stuff, they would just
[Guest]: go do stuff.
[Guest]: And Sheila was a disciplinarian.
[Guest]: So she didn't like, you know, she didn't like mess in the house or she didn't like, like
[Guest]: everything had to be done in time.
[Guest]: So she didn't like homework not being done and things like that.
[Guest]: So the thing was that, you know, they would try and sort of break Sheila's rules.
[Guest]: And I've, if you know, oftentimes, I was the supervising authority.
[Guest]: And if Sheila's rules were broken, then I would get, you know, get all the, I would
[Guest]: face the heat.
[Guest]: So she would tell me what kind of a dad are you, I use, you know, you don't care about
[Guest]: your children's future, I'll go down that rabbit hole.
[Guest]: And the kids would be laughing, like, you know, grinning from ear to ear, watching me
[Guest]: squirm in front of thing, knowing fully well that next time it happened, they would be
[Guest]: able to get away with that.
[Guest]: So what fatherhood made me was more indulgent, and more tolerant towards kids.
[Guest]: Kids were also, they had, they were very fun loving, they were funny in their own ways.
[Guest]: They were, they were charmingly innocent as well.
[Guest]: And they were different.
[Guest]: So older son was very sort of, you know, composed and reserved, and the younger one was bratty
[Guest]: and a little bit, you know, he was ebullient, he would like to jump around, sing, dance,
[Guest]: do all those kind of things.
[Guest]: So it was fun watching them.
[Guest]: My only regret is, it was a difficult time in my life, financially as well, you know,
[Guest]: the way my business was going, and I wasn't making any money.
[Guest]: And, you know, so I used to work a lot, run here, there, do a lot of things.
[Guest]: So I wasn't able to spend as much time as I could actually, I could have sort of recalibrated
[Guest]: my priorities, and I could have, because for all the running up and down that I did, my
[Guest]: business eventually, I mean, it sorted itself out and nothing, I mean, there are times when
[Guest]: the economy is down, you don't get orders, costs are up, you don't make money.
[Guest]: I had my share of those problems, but yeah, I think that's, that's pretty much, that's
[Guest]: pretty much it.
[Amit Varma]: Great.
[Amit Varma]: So finally, to, you know, ending it with kind of the predictable question of if my listeners
[Amit Varma]: are to want to kind of know, and actually even I want to know, because I don't think
[Amit Varma]: we've really discussed this, that recommend some books for us, some books that make you
[Amit Varma]: that when you think of them, you feel that man, everyone should read this, either for
[Amit Varma]: knowledge or for joy or whatever books that mean a lot to you.
[Guest]: One book that I strongly believe should be a one semester course for every undergrad
[Guest]: course in this country, in the world, is Thinking Fast and Slow.
[Guest]: So that, that's one book everyone needs to internalize totally.
[Guest]: It tells you how we are hardwired for biases, the different kinds of biases that are, and
[Guest]: as Kahneman himself, it is written by Daniel Kahneman, and as he himself notes that even
[Guest]: though you are aware of all the biases, you are still going to fall for them.
[Guest]: The thing is to know that those biases exist and to know when you've fallen in for them.
[Guest]: That's one book that I think everyone should read.
[Guest]: The other one, you know, there's this, there are many by Bertrand Russell, but the one
[Guest]: I really, because it was the one I read, is Why I'm Not a Christian.
[Guest]: It's not so much about not being a Christian, it's about not believing in something because,
[Guest]: just because someone, the standard stand you should take, everyone, all of us, is that
[Guest]: you don't believe in something unless there is a very good reason to believe in it.
[Guest]: And most of us, the exact opposite is true.
[Guest]: So we believe in something unless disproved.
[Guest]: Bertrand Russell convincingly states why it should be the other way around and in fiction,
[Guest]: I loved the Woodhouse universe.
[Guest]: I just read Woodhouse incessantly.
[Guest]: There were two things that appealed to me, I later realized.
[Guest]: One is, Woodhouse, all his situations are basically unreal.
[Guest]: So there are no serial, no one dies, no one gets hurt, no one goes bankrupt.
[Guest]: It's, you know, they have really silly problems, like uncle is threatening to cut off their
[Guest]: inheritance if they marry an undesirable person, things like that.
[Guest]: And the second thing is, he's always laughing at himself and, you know, along with that,
[Guest]: so most people who like Woodhouse I've seen have the ability and the capacity to laugh
[Guest]: at themselves.
[Guest]: That is something I think is a very valuable trait in people.
[Guest]: When something, when you do something silly or when you do something goofy, you should
[Guest]: have it in you to laugh at yourself.
[Guest]: And if someone else laughs, you laugh with them and that dissolves the poison of the
[Guest]: moment.
[Guest]: So those are things and then there are a few others I can't think of, okay, this is about
[Guest]: what I can think of on the spur of the moment.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe some other time.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe we shouldn't have, you know, both of us had that heavy ramen, wonderful, wonderful
[Amit Varma]: ramen before the show.
[Amit Varma]: So maybe we should have left it for later, but we'll have many more conversations.
[Amit Varma]: So thanks a lot.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this has been a long time coming, given that my origin story of the show begins
[Amit Varma]: with you.
[Amit Varma]: It's a bit of, you know, a shame that episode 250 is when it was, but we'll get on YouTube
[Amit Varma]: soon and everyone will laugh at us and we will laugh with them.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So looking forward to that, hopefully very soon.
[Guest]: And thanks for having me.
[Guest]: I sort of suspect I've been rambling.
[Guest]: If I have been, apologies, but.
[Guest]: This is a show for rambling.
[Guest]: So what do you think I do?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So thanks again and stay cool.
[Unknown]: Bye.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, so the episode isn't over yet.
[Amit Varma]: Up ahead are some fantastic anecdotes from Naren that made me laugh.
[Amit Varma]: And it also made me think, listen in.
[Amit Varma]: So story number one.
[Guest]: So there's this uncle I had, who's sadly no more.
[Guest]: And he wasn't well regarded in the family was considered and, you know, a bad egg, but
[Guest]: he was all kinds of awesome for me.
[Guest]: He had a wicked sense of humor, which took a very practical sort of thing.
[Guest]: So he actually went down and did mean things to people.
[Guest]: And so one was to his own mother.
[Guest]: So this is maybe 50s Mumbai, they used to live in Bhadala.
[Guest]: And so my grand aunt, she was my dad's aunt.
[Guest]: She had a brother who lived in Mulund.
[Guest]: Back in the day, if you want to get from Bhadala to Mulund, you had to walk, catch a train
[Guest]: at Dadar and then go to Mulund.
[Guest]: So she knew how to get from and she could speak only Kannada and Konkani.
[Guest]: She could speak no Hindi, no English, no Marathi, nothing.
[Guest]: She knew how to get from Bhadala where they lived to the other station, she would walk
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: And then from Mulund station, she knew how to go to her brother's house.
[Guest]: But she didn't know which train to take because it's bewildering, right?
[Guest]: And she couldn't read the indicators or anything.
[Guest]: So she asked her son, this uncle.
[Guest]: So it's very simple.
[Guest]: You just go to anyone on the platform.
[Guest]: And you ask them, yeh train Mulund kyun jata hai?
[Guest]: And poor thing, she had no clue.
[Guest]: So she spent an hour freaking out everyone on Mulund station by asking them a very existential
[Guest]: question.
[Guest]: Why is this train going to Mulund?
[Guest]: Everyone, mujhe kya malum, jata hai toh jata hogi.
[Guest]: And then someone, some kindly soul who knew her realized that she was in some kind of
[Guest]: a jam and then they rescued her and put her on the right train and she made it.
[Guest]: And he did another thing to another uncle of his.
[Guest]: And this uncle was there for my dad and this uncle's father's maternal uncle.
[Guest]: So they were very fond of their mama, they had only one mom.
[Guest]: And the nephews hated him because they would have to do all the work for him and they were
[Guest]: not really fond of him.
[Guest]: But luckily for them, he never used to come very often to Bombay, he used to live somewhere
[Guest]: down south.
[Guest]: One day he happened to come and this guy was assigned the task of going and picking him
[Guest]: up at Sion.
[Guest]: So from Mangalore back in the day, they would come in bus, all the buses would stop at Sion.
[Guest]: And from Sion to Vadala, it's like a longish walk.
[Guest]: Today we'll take a cab, but back in the day.
[Guest]: So he went there and the uncle goes down, gets down with his bedding and everything
[Guest]: and he expects his nephew to pick it up.
[Guest]: So nephew tells him that there's a recent police order saying that everyone has to carry
[Guest]: their own luggage because of some security issues, even back then, some story he told
[Guest]: him.
[Guest]: So he made this elderly uncle put all the things on his head and this guy had planned
[Guest]: it out.
[Guest]: So he had got a little bag, empty bag of his own with nothing, an empty dabba or something,
[Guest]: he took that and put it on his head and put it on his head and walked.
[Guest]: So he made sure that the uncle was carrying all the luggage.
[Guest]: Then when they got to their building, they have a large, it's still there.
[Guest]: It's a large iron gate, okay, which is always locked.
[Guest]: And there's a little wicked gate inside, which people go in.
[Guest]: So presumably that thing was for cars and nobody had cars back in the day, always locked.
[Guest]: And they get to this gate, they come to the building, they come to the gate and this guy
[Guest]: is like, oh my God, this gate is locked, how do we get in?
[Guest]: So the uncle is also nonplussed, he doesn't know what to do.
[Guest]: So he tells them, I'll tell you what, you leave the luggage here, you climb up the gate,
[Guest]: and you hop off on the other side, and then I will throw the luggage and then you catch
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And uncle said, okay, he left the luggage, 60 year old guy somehow clambered up the gate,
[Guest]: then hopped off to the other side, and he's waiting for the luggage to be thrown.
[Guest]: And this guy just opens the wicked gate, picks up the thing and comes in.
[Guest]: Fabulous use of incentives that uncle wouldn't have visited.
[Guest]: There are all these things, there are big sort of morals, life morals, but only problem
[Guest]: is I haven't figured out what the moral is, if, you know, there's some deep truth.
[Guest]: And I think the day I figure out the deep truth, I'll become a very lucky, prosperous
[Amit Varma]: person. Deep truth is in the questions, like, why does this train go to Mulund, should really
[Amit Varma]: be the title of a book or a film.
[Guest]: So the same uncle, who was made to climb up the gate and then hop off again, his sister
[Guest]: was my great grandmother, so my dad's grandmother, and my grandmother had a reputation of being
[Guest]: a very irascible lady.
[Guest]: She suffered no nonsense, she ran and back in the day, I mean, they came from a pretty
[Guest]: poor family and a large family, little food and, you know, it was always a woman's responsibility
[Guest]: to keep the ship sailing.
[Guest]: So my father tells me that, so there was a rule that if you leave anything on your plate,
[Guest]: especially the kids, the whole thing would get dumped on your head.
[Guest]: And you won't be allowed to have a bath all day. So you'd spend a whole day with like
[Guest]: food dripping on your head and stinking and everything.
[Guest]: And that was a lesson. So you learn that lesson once. So you just wiped everything clean as
[Guest]: clean as possible.
[Guest]: So that shows that kind of a person.
[Guest]: Anyway, this uncle was a big aficionado of classical, Hindustani classical music.
[Guest]: And I think I've got it from that, you know, that bloodline, because I am also very fond
[Guest]: of Hindustani classical music.
[Guest]: So his big favorite at that time was a legendary singer now named, I mean, she's no longer
[Guest]: alive, named Hirabai Barodekar.
[Guest]: So he went and bought one of those gramophones and a record of Hirabai Barodekar.
[Unknown]: And it was a morning rag.
[Guest]: So it was Ahir Bhairav or something.
[Guest]: And morning rags have to be heard in the morning.
[Guest]: So at four in the morning, he puts on the gramophone, he puts this plate and he starts
[Guest]: playing it.
[Guest]: And everyone is fast asleep.
[Guest]: And at four in the morning, we start singing.
[Guest]: My great grandmother, mother apparently thought somebody was being strangled.
[Guest]: So she comes running out, she's like, you know, she's had a hard day, she's like middle
[Guest]: of a sleep, she's in a panic, she comes running out.
[Guest]: And she finds this guy, you know, listening to music, she's so furious that she picks
[Guest]: up a coconut, which is lying around.
[Guest]: And she just hits him on the head with that coconut with such fury that apparently the
[Guest]: coconut cracked, this guy immediately went off into a coma, he just knocked out cold.
[Guest]: And apparently, that is the only time in recorded history, according to my dad, when the brother
[Guest]: that's my grandfather and his brother actually yelled at their mother, they would never like
[Guest]: motherly devotion was so strong that they would never, you know, speak, you know, harshly
[Guest]: to her.
[Guest]: Well, despite all this, I mean, she would be putting food on people's heads.
[Guest]: Another favorite torture of hers was to put pickle, like we make pretty spicy pickle into
[Guest]: children's eyes, if they, you know, if they misbehave or did something wrong, the punishment
[Guest]: was to take a little pickle and put in their eye.
[Guest]: It burns like hell.
[Guest]: So I've had that experience accidentally, I mean, you just touch some pickle, and then
[Guest]: you touch your eye, and then for hours later, it's burning.
[Guest]: But she was that kind of a lady and they never used to say anything.
[Guest]: Because that was how she was, she was a strict, non limit, fair lady, but like brutal.
[Guest]: And this was the only time they ever really yelled at her.
[Guest]: Luckily, uncle survived, he went on to father seven or eight children.
[Amit Varma]: So there was no permanent damage.
[Amit Varma]: Some parts of him were functional.
[Guest]: So once when I was in engineering, I had a close friend who used to live in Bandra in
[Guest]: very close to Pali Hill, and Bandra is a very different place.
[Guest]: Today it is a, you know, it's a very, very tony neighborhood and you know, only the richest
[Guest]: of the rich and the famous, only those people can live.
[Guest]: But back in the day, I'm talking about early 80s, it was like any other little, they had
[Guest]: a little village called Pali village.
[Guest]: So it had a little marketplace and that was where you would, you know, you could buy your
[Guest]: fish and meat and everything.
[Guest]: And there was a tailor shop there.
[Guest]: And it was just called Ladies Tailor, it was run by an old Muslim gentleman with a nice
[Guest]: flowing beard and they used to call him Chacha and that was the only tailor in town.
[Guest]: So one of his karigars, for some difference of opinion or whatever, he split, he split
[Guest]: from Chacha and he took a shop opposite and he started his own shop.
[Guest]: So he called it New Ladies Tailor because it was like, so Chacha, and all this every
[Guest]: day used to go up and down the market and you could see all this happening.
[Guest]: And the next thing that poor Chacha did was, in order to emphasize the vintage of his own
[Guest]: practice, he named his shop Old Ladies Tailor and that was it.
[Guest]: The next thing you know, Chacha went out of business for some mysterious reason, I don't
[Guest]: know why.
[Guest]: And then he converted it into a chicken shop.
[Guest]: So last time I went to Pali market, a chicken shop was still there.
[Amit Varma]: But it didn't say old chicken shop.
[Guest]: Story number four.
[Guest]: I spent a good four years of my life in Manipal and Manipal was a pretty, so the backstory
[Guest]: is this.
[Guest]: I wanted to get into medicine because my father was a doctor and I didn't get the marks.
[Guest]: So we went to, you know, Manipal was a donation, what used to be called a donation college.
[Guest]: So you had to pay what they call a capitation fee and you know, you just got it.
[Guest]: I don't think they were very choosy about who they took.
[Guest]: Anyway, I went there, the medical capitation fee was too high.
[Guest]: My father said, I can't afford this.
[Guest]: So my mother said, no, you have to be either a doctor or an engineer, otherwise who will
[Guest]: marry my son.
[Guest]: And he was right about that.
[Guest]: Literally no one who would marry me had like, I got the job finding someone to marry me
[Guest]: even though I did my engineering, but without engineering, there was no chance.
[Guest]: So I joined engineering and I spent the most delightful four years, just met the most amazing
[Guest]: people and had many amazing anecdotes from there.
[Guest]: But one I'll give and here I have to make a humble brag that Satya Nadella was two years
[Guest]: my junior and I keep telling everyone that whenever I met Satya, I used to tell him,
[Guest]: you should go and join Microsoft, you'll do well.
[Amit Varma]: So did you really tell?
[Guest]: I just tell everyone and most of the younger guys are very odd.
[Guest]: Actually I didn't even know him.
[Guest]: I mean, he was there, but no one knew him.
[Amit Varma]: This is like when I first shifted to seven bungalows in Andheri, I used to tell people
[Amit Varma]: I live in one of the original seven bungalows.
[Guest]: So we were like a new batch, we were the third cohort of the new thing, which was affiliated
[Guest]: to Mangalore University.
[Guest]: Before that, it was Mysore University and the Mysore University ones were very disconnected
[Guest]: from their university.
[Guest]: So all communication used to happen by telegram and back in the day, telegram was a thing.
[Guest]: So most of this generation wouldn't know what it was.
[Guest]: But if you do, you'll probably get this anecdote.
[Guest]: So one of these guys failed in that subject and he got 23 marks and you had to get 35
[Guest]: to pass and he thought everyone told him apply for revaluation.
[Guest]: So you pay a little fee and you fill out a form and it goes to the thing and you have
[Guest]: to also attach what was known as a reply pay telegram.
[Guest]: So a reply pay telegram is you pay for the telegram that the recipient will send and
[Guest]: you know that it's like a blank cheque.
[Guest]: So it could be 10 rupees, it could be 100 rupees, if the guy decides to send you a very
[Guest]: long telegram, you have to pay, but you have to pay all of it.
[Guest]: He paid, that was the rule, he paid it and in due course, the revaluation results came.
[Guest]: So it turned out that even the 23 marks that he got was a high number, his revalued result
[Guest]: was 19 marks.
[Guest]: But you know, the person who sent the thing, the clerk in the Vice Chancellor's office
[Guest]: was a kindly man, he said, let me spare this guy the expense at least.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm just conveying bad news.
[Guest]: Why make him pay a lot?
[Guest]: So he sent a single word, 19, that was it, but our local Manipal police post office interpreted
[Guest]: that as something known as a greetings telegram.
[Guest]: So back in the day, if you had a greet, if you wanted to send someone greetings, Diwali
[Guest]: greetings, you would send three and the three was code for Happy Diwali and New Year and
[Guest]: then it would come to Amit Verma saying that Happy Diwali.
[Guest]: So the code number for 19 was heartiest Guru Parb greetings.
[Guest]: So when the letter comes from the Vice Chancellor of Mysore University, everyone is really agog
[Guest]: with, you know, sort of anticipation, like, am I going to pass, have I made it, have I
[Guest]: made it to 35?
[Guest]: And all that the Vice Chancellor of Mysore University has to tell him is heartiest Guru
[Guest]: Parb greetings.
[Guest]: He never recovered from the shock and so I've variously told this anecdote as this having
[Guest]: happened to Satya Nadella and he got such a shock that he went to America and became
[Guest]: the CEO of Microsoft.
[Amit Varma]: But that's not true.
[Guest]: So at number five, okay, so I have a lot of pretty interesting uncles, aunts, cousins
[Guest]: and like over a period of time, some really hilarious things have happened.
[Guest]: So one such is the following.
[Guest]: So one of my cousins, so when you do your medicine, after you do your MBBS, you have
[Guest]: to enroll for surgery and then you have to serve some kind of slave labor called registrar
[Guest]: or not registrar, something, surgery resident, something.
[Guest]: So he has to basically be in surgery like day in, day out for several years till he,
[Guest]: you know, acquires the skills and then you give that exam and then you become a surgeon.
[Guest]: So when he was on that rotation, his mother, he was the only son, mother very fond of him,
[Guest]: mother was always, you know, she would always call him and this was, cell phones had just
[Guest]: sort of, you know, entered, you know, common, it would just become common and she would
[Guest]: call.
[Guest]: And this guy would, half the time he would be in the surgery or assisting with the surgery
[Guest]: or something, he couldn't take the call.
[Guest]: So he told his mom that, you know, whatever you want to tell me and they would, calls
[Guest]: would be like, have you had your food or, you know, have you, whatever, taken your medicines
[Guest]: or whatever, something very inane.
[Guest]: So he told his mom that, you know, you just text me, I mean, I'll respond to you whenever
[Guest]: I can.
[Guest]: And he indeed was in the operating theater 12 hours a day.
[Guest]: So she said okay, but she didn't know how to text, so he taught her.
[Guest]: So back in the day, it was those old Nokia phone thing and, you know, you had to, it
[Guest]: took a little doing, typing a text message, but she figured that out.
[Guest]: And then, so he worked in Sion Hospital and he lived in Juhu, so it wasn't very far, but
[Guest]: even so, he had to basically live in the hospital 24-7 and just come once a week or something,
[Guest]: change of clothes and things like that.
[Guest]: So he comes after his first week and mother says, you know, you haven't responded to a
[Guest]: single text, what's the matter?
[Guest]: So he said, I haven't received a single text, who have you been sending it to?
[Guest]: So she's been unfortunate, she wrote the text, but she didn't know how to send it.
[Guest]: So it's by default going to the first person in the address book, whose name begins with
[Guest]: A and it happens to be this guy's surgery boss.
[Guest]: This guy is like, you know, a gosh, I mean, what would his surgery boss think?
[Guest]: So he goes and he says, you know, I'm going to get yelled at because he's a famously irascible
[Guest]: man and he's like, your suffers no nonsense, so he says, I'm going to get yelled at today,
[Guest]: but I'll have to apologize, I didn't know.
[Guest]: So he goes and he tells the boss that this is what happened and to his immense surprise,
[Guest]: the guy almost breaks down into tears, he hugs him and embraces him and you know, he's
[Guest]: like overcome with emotion, like relief.
[Guest]: So I mean, he didn't understand what it was, then he figured it out later.
[Guest]: So apparently, this guy's mother used to write texts like I love you very much, xxx, missing
[Guest]: you so much and things like that.
[Guest]: And the surgery guy had no clue whom it was coming from.
[Guest]: And all he would get is text saying that I love you so much, I miss you so much, please
[Guest]: come home soon or whatever.
[Guest]: And he had to hurriedly delete all of them, lest his wife find out.
[Guest]: So when he found out that this was the explanation, his grief was, I mean, his relief was immeasurable.
[Guest]: He was like, completely relieved to know that his, you know, everything, his life was, he
[Guest]: was totally freaked out.
[Amit Varma]: He had no clue what was happening.
[Guest]: But I mean, I'm just thinking if his wife had actually heard, one divorce, surgery resident,
[Guest]: whatever, one surgery boss, the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, story number six.
[Guest]: Once I've, I don't know if you've been to Rajkot.
[Guest]: So I haven't been recently, but I went some years ago.
[Guest]: And at least when I went, Rajkot airport was a very charming little house like thing, you
[Guest]: know, it could be somebody's bungalow, it's that small, very nice.
[Guest]: And I landed up in Rajkot via Ahmedabad or something, I'd gone to Ahmedabad for some
[Guest]: work and then I had to go to Rajkot, so I took a bus and then I landed.
[Guest]: And then when my work was done, getting from Rajkot to Bombay is a pretty long journey.
[Guest]: So train was not an option, it was too long.
[Guest]: So I decided to fly.
[Guest]: And I was very, this is back in the day.
[Guest]: So not like not back in the days, maybe 15, 10-15 years ago.
[Guest]: And I booked and I did a web check-in, web check-in had been introduced and I got myself
[Guest]: a window seat because I wanted to see Rajkot from the air.
[Guest]: And you know, so the only window seat I could get was row number 27, which was the last
[Guest]: one.
[Guest]: And I took it.
[Guest]: And I landed up at the airport and it was Air India, very charming people.
[Guest]: They, you know, somebody came, picked my luggage, took me to the check-in counter.
[Guest]: It wasn't a very big flight.
[Guest]: And there's a nice young lady sitting behind the counter and she looks at my boarding card
[Guest]: and she says, oh, have you web checked in?
[Guest]: I said, I have.
[Guest]: Oh, but you have taken seat number 27F.
[Guest]: I said, yes, because I want a window seat.
[Guest]: But she says, sir, this is not a reclining seat.
[Guest]: I don't mind, it's like a 50-minute flight, so I don't mind.
[Guest]: She says, no, I have an aisle seat on number 17, so I can give you that.
[Unknown]: She says, no, I said, I'm okay with a window seat.
[Guest]: No, sir, but it's not reclining.
[Guest]: I said, doesn't matter.
[Guest]: She said, no, sir, you don't understand, at your age, it is better to have a reclining
[Guest]: seat.
[Guest]: So I was thinking of myself as a young whippersnapper and it was very clear what I looked like.
[Guest]: So I gracefully accepted her offer and went on row number 17, quietly like a gentleman.
[Amit Varma]: So now every time you kind of fly, you think of this and the realization of your sort of
[Guest]: advancing years.
[Guest]: Oh, yeah.
[Guest]: And this is the thing, right, so everyone has a memory of how or when they were first
[Guest]: called uncle.
[Guest]: So when you're a kid, nobody calls you uncle and all of a sudden you're like in your 20s
[Guest]: and some little kid says uncle and you're like, you know, that's a moment of truth.
[Guest]: You realize that you have crossed some boundary and now you're no longer the young man you
[Amit Varma]: thought you were.
[Amit Varma]: What's worse is when some adult calls you uncle, that's problematic.
[Guest]: Actually, yeah, actually girls are even more so.
[Guest]: So we had, we used to have an employee in an office and just to troll her, the boys,
[Guest]: the factory, she used to look after accounts or something and they used to call her auntie
[Guest]: and she used to really lose it like because she thought she was young.
[Guest]: So like 90% of our HR problems were guys going and calling her auntie and she's like yelling
[Amit Varma]: at them.
[Amit Varma]: I had a similar incident where I was at the Gaul Lit Fest after my book came out in 2009
[Amit Varma]: and Sarnath Banerjee was one of the other people there and I'm in my 30s and so is he.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point we went somewhere to some random beach or something and whatever and
[Amit Varma]: he introduced me to one of his friends and the friend asked me, are you his father?
[Amit Varma]: And the irony of this is Sarnath is older than me.
[Amit Varma]: So really,
[Guest]: Yeah, it's very brutal and completely gratuitous, right, you're not asking for his stage estimates
[Amit Varma]: and then somebody comes and gives it to you.
[Amit Varma]: But a dude who said that, you see me now, I look normal then.
[Guest]: So we had an acquaintance who was famously, you know, used to tell like, you go to a sabji
[Guest]: guy and he'll call you uncle and you sort of look down on him through his glasses and say,
[Guest]: hum aapse sabji lene aaye hain, rishta banane nahin aaye hain, aap humko uncle math boliyega.
[Guest]: That would shut them up for some time.
[Guest]: Seven.
[Guest]: So I am usually the know-all, know-it-all, right.
[Guest]: So Sheila resents that and she's like, whenever, and I'm one of those N2 cutlets who has to
[Guest]: jump in and enlighten everybody, you know, so mansplainer on steroids.
[Guest]: I'm trying to, personsplainer, but anyway.
[Guest]: So I had that and oftentimes to make matters worse, my explanations are also inaccurate
[Guest]: and downright wrong most of the time, but that's my nature, it used to be.
[Guest]: And I got my comeuppance in Uganda.
[Guest]: So one year we decided to go to Uganda as tourists.
[Guest]: Why Uganda specifically is a long story.
[Guest]: We wanted to go to Kenya, but somebody said Uganda, we landed up there.
[Guest]: And so we went to a place called Para Lodge or something.
[Guest]: It's a wildlife resort in the middle of nowhere and you can either fly in or you can take
[Guest]: a car and go.
[Guest]: So flying was too expensive.
[Guest]: We hired a vehicle.
[Guest]: We had a Ugandan driver named Ronald, very, you know, in Uganda everyone speaks English.
[Guest]: So that's because they have Swahili, they have their local language and then English.
[Guest]: So virtually everyone speaks English and reasonably decent English you can understand.
[Guest]: And so was Ronald.
[Guest]: But it was just very transactional, say good morning, sir, and would you like to stop for
[Guest]: lunch or a long drive.
[Guest]: And that's all that, all the interaction.
[Guest]: So we go to Para Lodge and then we go to another place called Pabidi Chimpanzee Reserve or something.
[Guest]: So it's a rainforest with chimpanzees.
[Guest]: So we go in and it was very nice to see chimpanzees in their natural habitat and you have a guide
[Guest]: and all of these people, they are very, you know, they're very knowledgeable about.
[Guest]: So we had a guide who told us about, you know, behavior of chimpanzees and actually chimpanzees
[Guest]: are pretty brutal animals.
[Guest]: So they're not the cuddly, sweet things that we think they are.
[Amit Varma]: I still remember the books of anthropologist Franz Zaval about this, where he talks about
[Amit Varma]: the chimpanzee politics and all of that.
[Guest]: And it's so much, actually baboon politics is even more interesting, but chimpanzees
[Amit Varma]: also.
[Amit Varma]: That whole fight over the alpha male, you know, the last time I read something like
[Amit Varma]: that, I kept thinking of Modiji versus Adityanathji.
[Guest]: You know, it's a lot of parallels among humans.
[Guest]: So all that was happening, then we come back and there's a nice sort of, you know, reception
[Guest]: area and Mashila wants to go to the loo.
[Guest]: So she's gone and I'm just hanging around and there is a tree and the manager of that
[Guest]: lodge was free, he was chatting me up, our driver Ronald was there too.
[Guest]: And he was telling me about the place and famous people who had come there, very popular
[Guest]: and apparently one of our Prime Ministers had come there, Indian Prime Minister, everything
[Guest]: was there.
[Guest]: Then I noticed this tree under which we are standing, it's pretty stark and in the middle,
[Guest]: on one of the branches, there's a riot of colors.
[Guest]: There's a plant with a lot of flowers on it.
[Guest]: So I said that looks unusual, I mean, rest of the tree, there's just a few very sparse
[Unknown]: pattern.
[Guest]: So the manager says this is probably a parasitic plant, you know, so it's basically sitting
[Guest]: on that and this happens in the forest and other plants, they draw the sustenance from
[Guest]: the main tree and then they do their thing.
[Guest]: And this is the first time Ronald pipes up and before this, Ronald has only asked me,
[Guest]: do you want to stop for lunch, do you want to stop for a toilet break, those are the
[Guest]: only things, sir, we should be getting on, it's going to be late.
[Guest]: That's literally the only thing.
[Guest]: He says, I don't think that is a parasitic plant, because if it were a parasitic plant,
[Guest]: then the branch at the distal end would be better because this plant would be sucking
[Guest]: out all the sap.
[Guest]: I think it's an epiphyte and the manager says, yeah, you're right, you're right, it must
[Guest]: be an epiphyte, it can't be a parasite.
[Guest]: And by this time, Sheila had returned and she was in on the entire conversation and
[Guest]: she was delighted to see me completely open mouthed, she knew I had no clue what an epiphyte
[Unknown]: was.
[Guest]: And her mansplainer, person-splainer husband was, for at least for a little while, stunned
[Amit Varma]: into silence.
[Amit Varma]: You were outshinoyed by Ronald.
[Amit Varma]: But did you find out his background?
[Guest]: Was he like a biology PhD or something?
[Guest]: He told me that, not that, but before he worked as a driver, he was a botanist at one of these
[Guest]: parks.
[Guest]: So he knew a lot about it, he was a botanist, that's what he told me.
[Guest]: I don't know what his qualifications were, but amazing, I mean, he was such a charming
[Guest]: fellow.
[Guest]: And then, unfortunately, that was the fag end of the trip and you know, we came back
[Guest]: to Kampala and we had to fly back.
[Guest]: I never got to know Ronald better.
[Amit Varma]: And shout out to Ronald, if he's listening to this, please get in touch with him.
[Guest]: Okay, story number eight, Bandra Pali Hill days.
[Guest]: So this friend who I used to hang out with, we used to hang out in, you know, in Bandra
[Guest]: and his house, a very nice, charming building they used to live in and nothing to do, we
[Guest]: just wander around and maybe play some cricket, do nothing.
[Guest]: And one day, we were just sitting there in his house and a neighboring auntie walks in,
[Guest]: she has a three-year-old daughter, she says, would you baby spend time with the uncle here,
[Guest]: I'm just coming or something like that.
[Guest]: And with practiced ease, she palms off the girl to us and she runs away like a hare,
[Guest]: because she wants some time to herself, she wants to go shop or something like that.
[Guest]: And this girl is one clingy mama, and absolutely on cue, moment the door shuts, she starts
[Guest]: crying mama.
[Guest]: And we don't know, we have zero experience in looking after little kids babysitting.
[Guest]: So we don't know what to do.
[Guest]: And we are trying to stress her.
[Guest]: Just then, one older, another neighbor, he just walks in, he hears all the din must be
[Guest]: happening, he says, what's happening?
[Guest]: So we tell him, yaar yeh aisa ho gaya, aa girl, no problem, I'll handle.
[Guest]: So he comes in, he says, do you have an album?
[Guest]: So the guy says, yaa hoga kuch toh, bring any album.
[Guest]: So he brings some album, travel album, and so he starts showing it to the girl and says,
[Guest]: see, this is this bhaiya, this is this didi, and this is this chacha.
[Guest]: And then eventually, as children, and this is a tip to all listeners, so if you ever
[Guest]: want to show a small child, show them photographs.
[Guest]: They will just stop and they'll just, you know.
[Guest]: So she shuts up, and he's showing all this thing, and says, see, all these people are
[Guest]: there, this bhaiya is there, that chacha is there, but where is your mummy?
[Guest]: Mummy!
[Guest]: She starts crying again.
[Guest]: So after she starts crying, he starts the whole thing again.
[Guest]: And the child sort of forgets, you know, she stops crying, eventually, and the moment she
[Guest]: stops crying, he says the same thing, see, all these bhaiya is there, didi is there,
[Guest]: but where's mummy?
[Guest]: It was the most hilarious, for two hours, actually, I think, I don't think it will pass
[Guest]: muster now.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you'll just get.
[Amit Varma]: You'll get the little girl addicted to Instagram, and then it's all over, dude.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Nowadays, it's a lot easier.
[Guest]: You just give them a phone and they shut up.
[Guest]: Back in the day, you could do that.
[Guest]: This guy was such a commensurate troll that he would, you know, he'd just make her cry,
[Amit Varma]: make her shut up.
[Amit Varma]: I think we might both be having a senior moment.
[Amit Varma]: Let me find the definition of commensurate.
[Amit Varma]: Commensurate is, I think, you know, when you pay someone a salary that is adequate for
[Amit Varma]: them, they say this is commensurate to his skills, which is exactly what it means.
[Amit Varma]: So what is the word we are both hunting for?
[Guest]: Maybe if listeners can figure it out, masterful.
[Amit Varma]: But we start with consummate, consummate, consummate, consummate, wow, redeems ourselves
[Guest]: in time.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to get into this and saying that where is the explainer, you know, okay, story
[Guest]: number nine.
[Guest]: Okay, this is a pet peeve of mine.
[Guest]: This obsession for English Premier League football team among the younger generation.
[Guest]: So big victim is my big patient, I should say, is my son.
[Guest]: My younger son, he's very fond, he used to be fond of Chelsea.
[Guest]: And then somewhere down the line, he changed his allegiance to Tottenham Hotspurs.
[Guest]: And they really spent a lot of time and energy.
[Guest]: So they watch every match.
[Guest]: And what I don't get, you know, there's this thing in Hindi, there's a saying called
[Guest]: Begane Shadi Mein Abdullah Deewana, it's like, you know, but they do that and they get very,
[Guest]: so I keep trolling them, you know, he and his friends will come to watch a match and
[Guest]: I start off, now they don't react, they know I'm just trolling them.
[Guest]: But it was my pet peeve, why are you celebrating, none of you have been to Tottenham, you have
[Guest]: no, what is your connect, and they're like, you'll never understand and you'll never walk
[Amit Varma]: alone.
[Guest]: That's a Liverpool thing.
[Guest]: So my thing was, I had if what, what if, let us say you have Tottenham Hotspurs, and there's
[Guest]: another team, maybe Liverpool, and you hate Liverpool and you love Tottenham.
[Guest]: And what if one of your favorite Tottenham players, like Harry Kane leaves and joins
[Guest]: Liverpool?
[Guest]: Do you still continue to love, you know, and be devoted to Tottenham?
[Guest]: And obviously the answer was yes.
[Guest]: So I said what happens if all each one by one, all your Tottenham players go and leave
[Guest]: Liverpool and coincidentally, Tottenham starts picking up players from Liverpool.
[Guest]: So after the transfer season is over, all your Tottenham players are now in Liverpool.
[Guest]: Now what do you do?
[Guest]: And yeah, so there, you know, it's, it's like a thought experiment, but they never get into
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: So they say that it's not possible, because apparently the transfer window there you can
[Guest]: only transfer three players or four.
[Guest]: But no one saw any any listener out there who wants to engage with the best reply I
[Guest]: got for this was from from one guy named Abhishek Upadhyay, who goes under the name logic on
[Guest]: Twitter.
[Guest]: And he says your allegiance is based on which jersey you bought from national market.
[Guest]: So yeah, if you have a Tottenham jersey, then it is Tottenham.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I find these tribal allegiances very weird.
[Amit Varma]: And you could extrapolate this and say that, why is it only weird that somebody sitting
[Amit Varma]: in Mumbai, who's never been outside Malad even perhaps support Tottenham, but it is
[Amit Varma]: equally weird to support India.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, all these are like abstract concepts, you can have a concrete loyalty to your family
[Amit Varma]: and people you have met, but anything beyond that is absolutely abstract, you're buying
[Guest]: into some kind of narrative scene there.
[Guest]: And the thing is, the tribalism is so strong that I've invariably found the that I piss
[Guest]: people off and I like when you threaten their tribal affiliations, they get threatened.
[Guest]: So there's some deep lesson to be learned from this about human behavior.
[Guest]: So I probably already learned I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, my allegiance when I follow football pretty closely, and my allegiance
[Amit Varma]: is more towards coaches, because I like the particular styles and the way a team plays.
[Amit Varma]: I was arguing with a friend of mine who's a big Barcelona fan about, you know, who fell
[Amit Varma]: in love with Barcelona in those years when, you know, 2010, 2011, when Guardiola was in
[Amit Varma]: charge and Messi was at his best.
[Amit Varma]: And the point is that that spirit, if you look at it has been transplanted elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: And it is perhaps today in Man City.
[Guest]: You know, so to actually I got this so over a period of time after after trolling these
[Guest]: young boys was, you know, the diminishing law of return.
[Guest]: So every time you troll them, initially, it was great fun.
[Guest]: After that, it's so I stopped only and then I started listening.
[Guest]: And then he started explaining the tactical and strategic aspects of and it's pretty intense.
[Guest]: I mean, so he would illustrate like, you know, you'd almost be able to predict what is going
[Guest]: to happen if this guy is heading out in the center, then these two guys will start coming
[Guest]: out in the wings and they are looking for a rebound and counter attack and so on and
[Guest]: so forth.
[Guest]: And then it's pretty clear that it's a big mind game.
[Guest]: And the players are really the managers, not the players, not just the players themselves.
[Amit Varma]: The continued loyalty towards the club is still irrational, because I'm guessing that
[Amit Varma]: your son must have fallen in love with Tottenham during the five and a half years when Mauricio
[Amit Varma]: Pochettino was a coach.
[Amit Varma]: And he was brilliant and they played a really attractive style of football, pressing all
[Amit Varma]: the time, possession, aggressive, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But ever since he got sacked, you know, they've had Mourinho and then Nuno just got sacked
[Guest]: and you know, the latest is Conte might be joining, who's also a defense plus counter
[Amit Varma]: attack kind of coach, though far better than similar coaches of that type.
[Amit Varma]: So it's like they're a completely different club if you look at the way they play.
[Guest]: So I wonder what your son feels about that.
[Guest]: It's good, it'll be a good discussion to have with them.
[Guest]: So story number 10.
[Guest]: So once Sheela and I, this way back when the boys were very, very young, we and Google
[Guest]: was not around, Google Maps definitely wasn't around.
[Guest]: So it's really way back.
[Guest]: We had to go to Pune, and to a place called Kalyaninagar, and that was because someone,
[Guest]: a relative on Sheela's side lived there and they've been inviting us for a long time and
[Guest]: I did want to go.
[Guest]: And so I took, I mean, we drove down, Sheela, the kids and I, and I, we had a map and we
[Guest]: got lost.
[Guest]: So there was no, we just lined up in Pune and Pune even back in the day was a pretty
[Guest]: scary place to drive in.
[Guest]: People have absolutely like random Brownian motion, I'm pretty sure that random Brownian
[Guest]: motion was first discovered in Pune, that the guy who discovered it, got the idea from
[Guest]: the traffic and then he goes and looks and says, Oh, this is Brownian motion.
[Guest]: So we got lost and one thing that I hate in life is asking for directions.
[Guest]: So I would rather navigate by the stars and then ask someone, but Sheela's not allowed.
[Guest]: She'll stop here, she'll ask this panwala, then 100 meters away, she'll ask another cyclist
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: But Pune being Pune, back in the day, there were no panwalas, no cyclists, nothing.
[Guest]: We just go around and then we find one elderly, distinguished looking elderly gentleman standing
[Guest]: on the road, doing pretty much nothing.
[Guest]: So I pull over and then we ask this gentleman, so he says, where do you want to go?
[Guest]: So I said, Kalyani Nagar, so he says, Kalyani Nagar, is that the one on Nagar Road, that's
[Guest]: the one, because that says Nagar, is that the one near the Poonawala stud farm?
[Guest]: I said, yes, I'm getting happier, he seems to know the place.
[Guest]: And it's somewhere near Viman Nagar, right?
[Guest]: Yeah, it's near Viman Nagar.
[Guest]: So I asked him, do you know how to go there?
[Guest]: He said, no.
[Guest]: That's it.
[Guest]: And he walked away.
[Guest]: That was the end of the conversation.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: This guy is more like Shenoy than Ronald.
[Amit Varma]: I have a Kalyani Nagar story.
[Amit Varma]: It's actually where I saw a naked woman in the flesh for the first time in my life.
[Amit Varma]: But it isn't what you think it is.
[Amit Varma]: So I was probably in the 9th standard, 8th or 9th standard, 9th standard probably.
[Amit Varma]: And I had gone to visit this friend of mine who lived there, who I haven't been in touch
[Amit Varma]: with since, but he's actually a very prominent economist right now.
[Amit Varma]: So I won't name him because very serious guy, as he was, he was a serious kid.
[Amit Varma]: So anyway, so we were in his bedroom chilling out and there was a third friend over there.
[Amit Varma]: And opposite his room, you know, the two balconies facing each other, opposite his room, some
[Amit Varma]: foreign a couple used to live.
[Amit Varma]: And he happened to mention that the lady used to walk around naked.
[Amit Varma]: So at one point in time, you know, both me and this other friend, I'm trying hard not
[Amit Varma]: to take their names because they're just coming.
[Amit Varma]: Me and this other friend, we just opened the curtain a little bit and we see that she's
[Amit Varma]: stark naked and she's walking around in the room.
[Amit Varma]: She's doing something.
[Amit Varma]: And then she comes out on the balcony and she's standing there.
[Amit Varma]: So both of us, 9th standard kids, right, this is back in the day, you don't even have free
[Amit Varma]: access to porn and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Both of us went mad and we jumped up.
[Amit Varma]: And this economist friend whose room it was, was very chill.
[Amit Varma]: He said, I can see what you're doing.
[Amit Varma]: Don't do it.
[Amit Varma]: But we just went nuts.
[Amit Varma]: We opened the balcony door and we also go out in the balcony and right opposite her,
[Amit Varma]: which was the stupidest thing to do.
[Amit Varma]: And she just looks at us, looks away, turns this way, turns that way and then casually
[Amit Varma]: walks inside and shuts the door and that was the end of the show.
[Amit Varma]: So an early kind of lesson there, I suppose.
[Guest]: There is some like economic lessons also, right, when you have some insights and you
[Guest]: want to do something in the market, you have to do it as they say in Bombay, Sumdi mein.
[Guest]: So Sumdi is, I love that, I have no idea what the etymology of that word is, but Sumdi apparently
[Guest]: means slyly.
[Guest]: So you have to do it very slyly without anyone knowing what's happening.
[Amit Varma]: Many deeper questions, yeh train Mulund kyu jati hai?
[Guest]: Story 11.
[Guest]: So I grew up listening to a lot of classical, Hindustani classical music, and I grew very
[Guest]: fond of it to the point that I'm unable to listen to any other kind of music.
[Guest]: I just listen to Hindustani classical and as fate would have it, both my children, at
[Guest]: least my oldest son hated it, like when he was a toddler, if I put on a Hindustani tape,
[Guest]: he would start crying loudly or when he learned how to walk, he would just go and start hitting
[Guest]: the nearest person.
[Guest]: So if it was mom, he would start hitting mom, if it was me, just stop, just stop, you just
[Guest]: come and hit.
[Guest]: So like over a period of time, it just stopped.
[Guest]: And then they grew up and then it was no longer such a big issue and I discovered the internet
[Guest]: and you had all these things and you could get free mp3s and one of my favorite singers
[Guest]: was Mallika Arjun Mansoor and Mallika Arjun Mansoor had released very few records and
[Guest]: I had all of them, so I'd listen to them.
[Guest]: And when the internet started, a lot of private recordings, people started putting them up.
[Guest]: They were recordings of bytags, little mp3 clips were available.
[Guest]: So I hungrily would download them and sort of listen to them and that was my biggest
[Guest]: use case was hunting for Mallika Arjun Mansoor and back in the day, this was the moment you
[Guest]: wanted to download music, they would start hurling all kinds of hot picks.
[Guest]: So if you said, you know, you want to listen to Gloria Estefan, you would get hot picks
[Guest]: of Gloria Estefan or whatever.
[Guest]: Hot picks of Mallika Arjun Mansoor.
[Guest]: So one day I do that, I'm hunting and I've listened to whatever was available, but I'm
[Guest]: still hopeful somebody will put up something new.
[Guest]: And what I've downloaded, what's come on the screen is download hot pictures of Mallika
[Guest]: Arjun Mansoor.
[Guest]: And then we go off for dinner or something like into the dining room and then we eat
[Guest]: and then I come back to my room and then Sheela happens to see and she couldn't stop laughing.
[Guest]: So then she's ever since she calls Mallika Arjun Mansoor the Madhuri Dixit of Hindustani
[Guest]: classical music, which is absolutely very, it's a very inside joke.
[Unknown]: So wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure there are many, many fans of Mallika Arjun Mansoor listening to this, but this
[Amit Varma]: is a new angle.
[Guest]: He's so unlike any, I mean, he's such a, I mean, such a great singer.
[Amit Varma]: Also a great title for a book or a film, download hot pictures of Mallika Arjun Mansoor.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Scene and the Unseen?
[Amit Varma]: If so, would you like to support the production of the show?
[Amit Varma]: You can go over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep
[Amit Varma]: this podcast alive and kicking.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.